 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO POLICE SERVICE  
 
 
S TAND IN G OR D ER S 1 
 
P OLICE    SE RVICE    ORDE RS 



 
 
 
2 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO POLICE SERVICE  
 
  S .O.              No.   1 Police Service Orders   
 
Police Service Orders 
 
 
 
SE CTION 
ARR AN GE ME N T OF SE CT ION S 
1. Interpretation  
2. Police Service Orders  
3. Departmental Or der s 
4. Divisional/ Branch Orders 
5. Service  Or der s 



Interpretation  
 
 
 
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO POLICE SERVICE  3 
Police Service Orders  S .O.  No.    1 
 
 
1. “ In this Standing Order:   
 
“Circulars” are official pub lications of matters affecting 
police officers which shall be brought to their attention by 
the Commissioner  of Police and other Executive police 
officers. 
 
“Departmental  Order s” a r e   general i n s t r u c t i o n s            
issued    by   t he   Commissioner    of   Police            
for the  information of    police o fficers and civilian 
employees , who  are    required to comply with these 
instructions.  
 
“Divisional/ Bra nch Orders” are      instr uctions 
iss ued by the Officer in Cha rge of a Division /Bra nch/ 
Section/ Unit for the general             information and  
guidance  of all personnel  attached  to tha t Division 
/Bra nch/ Section / Unit. 
 
“Files” refers to a collection of related documents kept 
together and classified in an orderly manner, and shall 
include digital files.  
 
“Operational Orders ” are Orders issued by the 
Commissioner of Police, a Deputy Commissioner of Police 
or an Assistant Commiss ioner of Police and Heads of 
Divisions to deal with specific events such as Carnival, 
Elections, Official Visits, etc. 
 
“Policies” are a course or principle of action adopted, written 
and approved by the Commissioner of Police for general 
information and guidance of all police o fficers and civilian 
employees. Policies of the Trinidad and Tobago Police 
Services represents general instructions approved by the 
Commissioner of Police to be observed by all personnel.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
Police Service 
Orders 
“Sta nding Orders” are general instructions issued     
by the Commiss ioner of Police from time to time an d  
published for the efficient and effective      
administr ation of the Service. 
 
“Station Orders” shall be issued by Officers in Charge of 
Divisions / Branches/ Section/ Unit in respect of each 
Station under their command. These Orders shall be 
applicable to the Station concerned, and kept in the Station 
Order File. Copies of these ord ers shall be filed at 
Divisional/ Branch/ Section/ Unit Headquarters. 
 
 
2. Police Service Orders  shall consist of Standing Orders , 
Departmental Orders, Divisional/ Branch   Orders, Policies, 
Operational Orders, Circulars, Notices and Station Orders.   
 
 
3. (a)  “Departmental   Or der s” shall  be  divided  into three  (3)    Departmental  
par ts: 
 
 
(i) Part I shall contain Orders of a tempora ry or 
personal natu re such as Postings/Tra nsfers, 
Leave, Discha rges, Rew ards , P u n i s h m e n t, 
etc. 
(ii) Part II shall cont ain instr uctions and guidelines  
which affect the general administra tion of  the 
Service, Divisions /Bra nches/ Sections/ Units . 
(iii) Part III shall cont ain all mat ters concerning the 
Sp ecial Reserve Police and the Supp lement al 
Police. 
 
Or der s 



Divisional/ 
Branch Orders  
4 TR IN IDAD AND TOB AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
 
  S .O.       No.   1 Police Service Orders   
 
 
(b) Part II of all Depart ment al Orders shall be used for 
reference and instruction of personnel at all Sta tions 
/Bra nches / Sections/ Units. 
 
(c) Part III of all Depart ment al Order s shall be brought to the   
at ten tion   of a l l    personnel   by   their   Heads   of 
Divisions/Bra nches/ Sections/ Units.  
4.  (a) A copy of e v e r y D i v i s i o n a l/ Bra nch Order iss ued  by 
Officers in  Cha rge  of  Division s/Bra nches/ Sections/ Units  
is  to be  forwarded to the Commiss ioner of Police  and all 
other Executive Officers for their informa tion. 
 
(b) A copy shall also be forwarded to the officer in cha rge of 
every other Division /Bra nch/ Section/ Units, t o  which the  
Order is considered relevant.  
 
(c) The Officer in charge of the Division/ Branch/ Section/ 
Unit upon receipt of the copies of a ll Divisional  / Bra nch   
Orders shall cause the Orders to be brought to the attention of all 
police officers under his command electronically or otherwise for 
gen era l in forma t ion. 
 
Service 
Orders  5. Police Service Orders  which are not published on the Police 
Service Portal  shall be kept in separate files  under the appropriate 
headings at the respective Division  /Branch /Section /Unit /Station 
/Post . 
 
 
 
 