 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO POLICE SERVICE  
 
 
STANDING O R D E R S 4 
 
P E RSONN E L    RE CORD S 



 
 
 
2 TRINIDAD AND  T O B A G O  P O L I C E S E R V I C E 
 
S .O. No. 4 Personnel Record s 
 
Personn el Reco rds  
 
              ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
 
                      SECTION 
1. Interpretation 
2. Service Numbers 
3. Records  
4. Personal File 
5.  Divisional Personal Files 
6. General 
7. Commiss ioner to Kee p Divisional Personnel Files of First Division Officer 
8. Divisional Personal Files/In set Sheet s of Second Division Officer s 
9. In set Sheet 
10.  Con duct Sheet 
11.  Photographs to be included on Con duct Sheet 
12.  Tra inees ’ Con duct Records  
13.  Medical History Records  



3 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLIC E  SERVICE 
Personnel Record s S .O. No . 4 
 
Service 
Number 
Records 
Interpretation  
 
1. In this Standing Order : 
“Conduct Sheet” is a document on which shall be recorded the 
Personal Dat a; Promotion s; Pu nishment s; and Commendation s, 
Awards and Rew ards  of an officer . 
 
“Files” refers to a collection of related documents 
kept together and classified in an orderly manner, and 
shall include digital files.  
 
“Inset Sheet” refers to a document on which shall be 
recorded the posting/ transfer s of an officer  from one  
Division/B ranch/Section/Unit  to another,  his 
performance and assessment from time to time, 
special qualifications and suitability for promotion.  
 
“Medical History” shall be defined as the sick leave, 
exemptions, injury leave and any other medical record 
pertaining to an officer.  
 
“Personnel” refer s t o those per sons who hold the offices 
sp ecified in the First and Second Schedules of the Police 
Service Act, Chapter  l5:0l as amended.   
 
 
2. Every police o fficer on app oint ment shall be given a Service 
Number which he shall retain th roughout his service in 
accordance with Regulation 8 of the Police Service 
Regulations, Chapter l5:01 as amended.  However, during the 
General Policing Programme Level I and II, trainees shall 
be issued with tempora ry consecutive nu mbers starting with 
T-l. These tempora ry nu mbers will be re-iss ued o n  a  
c y c l i c a l  b a s i s . 
 
3. Records of all personnel in the Police Service shall be kept by  
the Commissioner of Police a nd Officers-in-Cha rge of 
Divisions/Bra nches/Sections/ Units . These records shall be 
as follows: 
 
(a) Personal  Files; 
 
(b) Divisional Personal Files; an d 
 
(c) Medical History Records . 
 
 
 
 



4 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLIC E  SERVICE 
S .O. No . 4 Personnel Record s 
 
Personnel 
File 
Divisional 
Personnel File 
 
 
4. (1) A Personal File shall be kept by the Commiss ioner of 
Police in resp ect of ever y member of the Se rvice. In this file 
shall be recorded informa tion prescribed  in accordance  with 
Regulation  47 of the Police Service Regulations, Chapter l5:0l 
as amended. 
 
(2) The Commiss ioner may, from t ime to time, require 
add itional in forma t ion to be placed in such files. 
 
5. (1) (a) A Divisional Personal File shall be kept with resp ect  
to every membe r of t he Police Service a t t he Divi sion 
/Bra nch/Section/Unit to which the officer is p osted / 
tra nsferred with the exception of First Division 
Officers. 
    (b) All postings/tra nsfers, leave record, duplicate conduct  
sheets, performance appraisal reports  and any additional 
information as instructed by the Commissioner  of Police  
under section 4 (2) shall be recorded in the f ile. 
 



5 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLIC E  SERVICE 
Personnel Record s S .O. No . 4 
 
Commissioner  
to keep 
Divisional 
Personal Files  
of First 
Division 
Officers 
 
 
(2) Within 14 days of  a p o l i c e  officer  being  tra nsferred, t he Officer-
in-Cha rge of t he Division /Bra nch/Section/Unit shall tra nsmit, u n d e r  
c o n f i d e n t i a l  c o v e r ,  his  Divisional Personal File to the Officer-
in-Cha rge of  the Division /Bra nch/Section/Unit to which he  is 
tra nsferred. 
 
(3) The In set Sheet of the tra nsferred officer shall be forwarded 
to the Commiss ioner of Police within 14 days  of the effective date of 
the transfer . A  new Inset Sheet shall be opened at the Division 
/Bran ch/Section/Unit to which the officer is tra nsferred. 
 
 
Gen era l 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. (1) All Personal and Divisional Personal Files shall be kept 
under confidential cover. 
 
(2) Within seven (7) days of a Second Division Officer’s 
departure from the Service, the Officer in Charge of the Division/ Branch/ 
Section/ Unit to which he was last attached shall submit  his Divisional 
Personal File, under confidential cover, to the Deputy Commiss ioner with 
responsibility for Administration with a final report on the In set Sheet 
cont aining the following: 
(a) Rea son for departure ; 
 
(b) Charac ter ; 
 
(c) Con duct ; 
 
(d) Man ner in which the officer per formed his duties. 
 
The report is to be brief and accura te, as it will be used t o a 
great extent by the Commiss ioner of Police in the iss uing of 
Discha rge Certificates. These certificates shall be issued within one month 
of the effective date of the officer’s departure from the service. 
 
 
7. The Divisional Personal Files of all First Division Officer s shall 
be kept by the Commiss ioner of Police. On the promotion of a Second 
Division Officer to the First Division, his Divisional Personal File shall  
immediately be forwarded by the Officer-in-Cha rge of his Division 
/Bra nch/Section/Unit to the Commiss ioner for retention. 



6 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLIC E  SERVICE 
S .O. No . 4 Personnel Record s 
 
Divisional  
Personal  
Files / Inset  
Sheets of  
Second  
Division  
Officers  
Inset Sheet 
Conduct Sheet 
 
8. (1) The Divisional Personal Files of Second Division   
Officer s att ached t o a Division /Bra nch/Section/Unit shall be kept by 
the Officer-in -Cha rge of the said Division /Bra nch/Section/Unit. 
 
(2) The Inset Sheets of all off icers under  his co mma nd, 
togeth er with the Divisional Personal  Files of all Second Division 
Officers, shall be kept under  “confidential cover” in the sole custody  
of t h e  Officer -in-Cha rge of the Division /Bra nch/Section/Unit to 
which these officer s are posted/tra nsferred. 
 
9. (1) The In set Sheet ( S e e  A p p e n d i x  “ A ”)  is opened when 
an officer is tra nsferred to a Division /Bra nch/Section/Unit for the 
first time. Ent ries on this sheet shall be made only by the Officer-in-
Cha rge of the Division/Bra nch/Section/Unit. 
(2) On tra nsfer from the Division/Bra nch/Section/Unit the 
Inset Sheet shall  be upd ated and sent directly  to the Commiss ioner 
of Police  and a n ew Inset Shee t opened at the new 
Division/Bra nch/Section/Unit.   
(3) Where entries, adverse or commendable are to be made 
on the Inset Sheet, a police officer shall be informed in writing by 
the Officer-in-Cha rge of the Division/Bra nch/Section/Unit to which 
tha t officer is att ached. 
 
 
10. (1) Con duct Sheet s (See Appendix “B”)  shall be kept with 
resp ect to   every member of the Service. 
a)  Conduct Sheets in respect of First Division 
Officers shall be done in duplicate. The 
original shall be kept by the Commissioner 
of Police; and the duplicate by the Deputy 
Commissioner with responsibility for 
Administration  
 
b) Conduct Sheets in respect of Sec ond Division 
Officers shall be done in triplicate. The  
original shall be kept  at the Human Resource 
Branch, t he duplica te in t he relevan t Divi sion al 
Person al F ile at t h e i r  Divi sion  /Bra nch 
/Section/Unit Headqu a rters; a nd t he t riplica te 
w h e r e the officer  is posted.  



7 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLIC E  SERVICE 
Personnel Record s S .O. No . 4 
 
 
(2) All ent ries on Conduct Sheets of SDOs will be ma de as set out 
hereunder: 
(a) In the case of originals—under supervision of the 
Deputy Commiss ioner with responsibility for 
Administration ; 
(b) In the case of duplicates—under super vision of the 
Officer-in-Cha rge of the Division/Bra nch/ 
Section/Unit; 
(c) The original and du plicate Con duct Sheets shall be 
checked and initialed once a mont h by a First 
Division Officer. 
In the case  of the original, by a First Division Officer 
designa ted by the Deputy Commiss ioner with 
responsibility for Administration ; 
In the case of the duplicate, by a First Division 
Officer designa ted by the Officer-in-Cha rge of the 
Division /Bra nch/Section/Unit; 
(d) In the ca se of triplicate—by the Second Division 
Officer-in-Charge  of the Sta tion/Bra nch/ Unit, who 
shall record and initial such ent ries.  
(3) (a) Ent ries, except in the case of personal dat a, shall be ma de 
on the Conduct Sheets only after publication in Depart ment al 
Orders. The Depart ment al Order reference must be entered in the 
rema rk s colum n on the Con duct Sheet in the case of every ent ry; 
(b) All ent ries of commendations/awards /rewards  shall be ma de 
in red ink ; 
(c) All punishm ents and other ent ries shall be 
recorded in blue/black ink. 
 
(4) Whenever a Second Division Officer is promoted to the rank of Sergeant, 
his triplicate Conduct Sheet shall be sent immediately to the Officer -in-
Charge   of the Division/Branch to which the officer is attached to be 
inserted in the officer’s Divisional Personal File.



8 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLIC E  SERVICE 
S .O. No . 4 Personnel Record s 
 
Photographs  
to be included  
on Conduct  
Sheet 
Trainees/ 
Probationers Conduct  
Records 
 
11. (1) A passp ort size photograph of every member of t h e Police 
Ser vice  shall be affixed on the original and duplicate of the police 
officer’s Conduct Sheet.
 
(2) Such photogra ph of th e officer concern ed sha ll be reta ken 
every ten year s an d atta ched to th e respective Conduct Sheets. 
 
(3) The Officer-in-Cha rge of the Division/Bra nch/Section/Unit is 
to ensure tha t the photograph s of the officer s under his comma nd are 
retaken within the per iod  a s sp ecified above an d is to arra nge with 
the Head of the Criminal Investigations Depart ment an d Criminal 
Records Office to have two photographs taken . 
 
(4) The Officer-in-Cha rge of the Photography Section sha ll, on 
completion, submit these photographs to the Officer-in-Charge of the  
Division/Bra nch/Section/Unit who, upon r eceipt , shall att ach one  
photograph to the duplicate con duct sheet an d the other sent to Human 
Resource Branch to be att ached to the resp ective officer s’ Personal  File. 
 
12. (1) The Officer -in -Cha rge of the Police Academy shall keep all 
pertinent in forma t ion regarding train ees in i n d i v i d u a l  files. 
These f i l e s  shall  contain tr ainees’ performa nces, medical histories, 
sp ecial qualification s, etc. 
 
(2) The Officer -in-Charge of the Police Academy , on the posting  
of a trainee, shall  prepare a Divisional Personal File in respect of each 
trainee which shall be forwarded to the Division /Branch/Section/Unit 
to which the officer is posted  within 14 days  of the posting . 
 
(3) The Officer -in-Charge of the Division / Branch/Section /Unit  
to which the member of the Police Service is attached shall, at the end 
of the officer’s probationary per iod, report within 14 days to the 
Com missioner  of Police  on his suitability for confirmation of 
appointment. He shall make these comments on t he “Probationers 
Rating  Form”. 
 
(4) When the officer is confirmed  in his appointment, such 
confirma tion shall be recorded on the “ Probationers Rating  Form ” and 
this form, together with the pertinent data referred to above, shall  now 
form part of his Personal File.  
 
 
 
 



9 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLIC E  SERVICE 
Personnel Record s S .O. No . 4 
 
Medical 
History 
Records 
8  TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  P OLIC E  SERVICE 
Personnel Records  S .O. No . 4 
 
  
13. A Medical History Record shall be established for every police officer at a Central 
Registry in Human Resource Branch. This Registry will be responsible for collating all 
sick leave taken by members of the Service.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
 




1
1 
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLIC E  SERVICE 
Personnel Record s S .O. No . 4 
 
 
 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO P OLIC E SERVICE   9 
 
S .O. No . 4 Personnel Records  
 
 
 
  
