TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
STANDING  ORDERS  3
COMMENDATIONS, AWARDS, GIFTS AND REWARDS



Commendations, Awards, Gifts and Rewards
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
SECTION
1. Commendations 
2. Awards
3. Awards Board 
4. Publication and Endorsement of Commendation/Award
5. Recommendation for Awards
6. Gifts, Rewards
7. Police Officer not to accept presents from Subordinate Officers
8. Exceptions
PART  II
P
ROCEDURE FOR THE WEARING OF MEDALS,
BAR PINS AND DECORATIONS
9. (a) Long Service Medal
(b) Meritorious Service Medal
(c) Miniature Medal
(d) Commissioner’s Medal for Gallantry
10. (a) Bar Pins
(b) The categories for Long Service Awards
11.  Authority
12. Manner of wearing Medals
13. Bar Pins
14. Duties of Police Officers in receipt of Medals
2 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 3 Commendations, Awards, Gifts and Rewards



1. (1) The Commissioner of Police may grant commendations
and/or awards to members of the Service for exemplary work done
in the course of their duties.
(2) “Commendations” are written expressions of praise and
are of three (3) types namely:                  
(a) Special Commendation
(b) High Commendation
(c) Commendation
These commendations are granted in a descending order of
merit.
2. (1) “Awards” refer to medals and/or decorations given to
police officers as conspicuous tokens for services rendered to the
State, Police Service or other Institutions.
(2) Awards may be monetary or of such other accolades as
mentioned in the Police Service Regulations or as prescribed from
time to time by the Government of Trinidad and Tobago.
(3) The Commissioner may award a Merit Badge for good
conduct to any Constable, who he is satisfied, has served with
distinction.
3. The Commissioner shall appoint a Committee called the
“Awards Board” to advise him on the grant of awards and/or
commendations in accordance with Regulation 62 of the Police
Service Regulations, Chap. 15:01.
4. Where the Commissioner approves a commendation and/or
award and it is published in Departmental Orders, an entry to
that effect shall be made on the Conduct Sheets of both the
Divisional Personal File and the Personal File of the recipient.
The Departmental Order Reference will be endorsed on the
Conduct Sheets of the recipients.
5. (1) Instances of outstanding work which are considered to
merit the granting of an award and/or commendation should be
brought to the notice of the Officer-in-Charge of a Division/Branch
by an officer senior to the officer recommended.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 3
Commendations, Awards, Gifts and Rewards S.O. No. 3
Commenda-
tions
Awards
Awards Board
Publication
and
Endorsement
of
Commenda-
tion/Award
Recommenda-
tion for
Awards



(2) (a) The Officer-in-Charge, upon receipt of such recommen-
dation referred to, must review it and if he is of the view
that it merits such recognition, shall forward the
recommendation together with statements where avail-
able, to the Secretary of the Awards Board.
(b) If he is not of the view that it merits recognition, he shall
forward the recommendation and statements along
with his opinion to the Secretary of the Awards Board.
(3) It is expressly forbidden for members of the Service to
submit applications on their own behalf to the Officers-in-Charge of
Divisions/Branches for awards.
6. Except with the permission of the Commissioner, a Police Officer
shall not accept:
(a) any gift or reward from any member of the public or
from any organisation for services rendered in the
course of his official duties; or
(b) any present which is likely to influence him in the
performance of his duties.
7. (1) A Police Officer shall not receive from a subordinate
officer(s) any present, gift or reward except with the permission of  the
Commissioner of Police.
(2) Where the Police Officer who is to be  the recipient of any
present, gift or reward referred to in (1) above is the Commissioner, he
shall not receive same, except, with the permission of the Permanent
Secretary.
8. Notwithstanding paragraphs 6 and 7 above, a Police Officer may
accept a present offered by:
(a) a representative of a foreign Government on the
occasion of an official visit to this country;         
(b) a community organisation, on a social occasion where
the gift represents the work or achievement of that
organisation;
(c) other officers in the Service on the occasion of his
marriage, retirement, transfer or other notable occa-
sions to which the Commissioner signifies approval.
4 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 3 Commendations, Awards, Gifts and Rewards
Gifts,
Rewards
Police Officer
not to accept
presents from
subordinate
officers
Exceptions



PART II
PROCEDURE FOR THE WEARING OF MEDALS,
BAR PIN AND DECORATIONS
9. (a) “Long Service Medal” is awarded to Police Officers who
have served the organisation for over ten (10) years.
(b) “Meritorious Service Medal” is awarded to Police
Officers who have served the organisation for more than
30 years and have attained the rank of sergeant.
(c) “Miniature Medal” is provided to recipients of Long
Service Medal and Meritorious Service Medal. These are
to be worn with mess dress only.
(d) “Commissioner’s Medal for Gallantry” is awarded to any
person in Trinidad and Tobago including Police Officers
in circumstances where that person has acted bravely.
(e) “Bar Pins” are decorations warn to represent the Medal
awarded to a Police Officer for his length of service.
10. The Meritorious Service and Gallantry Medals shall
be awarded in gold only; and the Long Service Medal shall be
awarded in Silver only:
(a) “Bar Pins” are decorated with red, white and
blue colours for the medal of meritorious service
and gallantry; and blue with gold stars
representing years of service. The first star
depicting ten (10) years of service and each
additional star, five (5) years service.
(b) The categories for long service awards are as
follows: 
(i) 10 years to 14 years
(ii) 15 years to 19 years
(iii) 20 years to 24 years
(iv) 25 years to 29 years
(v) 30 years to 34 years
(vi) 40 years and over.
11. Authority:
Police Officers are authorised to wear Bar Pins with
medal and ribbons.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 5
Commendations, Awards, Gifts and Rewards S.O. No. 3
Medal
Bar pins
Authority



12. Medals shall be worn by Police Officers in the following
manner:
(a) On Ceremonial occasion—
(i) First Division Officers Service Dress and
and Inspectors Review Order,
Tunics or Jackets
(ii) Other Ranks Patrol Order No. 1
13. Bar Pins shall be worn by Police Officers daily in the following
manner:
(i) First Division Officers and
Inspectors Patrol dress only
(ii) Other Ranks Patrol Order Nos. 2, 3,
4 only
14. Police Officers who have received Medals for Exemplary
Performance, Long Service and Gallantry shall—
(a) In the case of National Awards:
(i) Affix the ribbon with medals and decorations
over the left breast.
(ii) Place the Medal in a horizontal manner
suspended from a Broochhidden from view.
(iii) Place the top of the ribbon midway between
the collar of the Tunic and the first button so
that the base of each medal is in line with the
top of the button on the left breast pocket.
(iv) All other medals and decorations must be
worn subordinate to a national award. 
(b) In the case of Police Medals and other authorised
medals and decorations—
(i) (i), (ii) and (iii) shall apply with the necessary
changes.
(ii) Place the other medals from left to right over
the left breast pocket in a neat line.
(c) In the case of approved decorations—
(i) (i), (ii) and (iii) shall apply with the necessary
changes.
(d) In the case of Police Officers in Civilian Dress:
(i) Place the ribbon in the centre over the
pocket of the jacket approximately 0.33 mm
above the top of the pocket.
6 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 3 Commendations, Awards, Gifts and Rewards
Manner of
wearing
Medals
Bar Pins
Duties of
Police
Officers in
receipt of
Medals