 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TRIN IDAD AN D T O B A G O P OLICE SE RVICE 
 
 
S TAND IN G OR D ER S 7 
 
POLICE IDE N TIF ICATION CARDS 



2 TR IN IDAD AND TOBAGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
S .O. No. 7 Police Identifi cat ion Card s and Badges 
 
 
Police Ide ntification Cards and Badges 
ARR AN GE ME N T   OF   SE CT ION S 
SE CTION 
1. Iss ue of Police Id entification Car ds and badges 
2. U se of Police Identification  Car ds and badges 
3. Misuse of Police Id enti fi cati on C ar ds and badges 
4. Car rying of Police Id entification Car ds and badges 
5. Security of Police Id entification Car ds and badges 
6. Loss/ Theft of Police Id entification Car ds and badges 
7. Presenta tion of Police Id entification Car ds and badges 
8. Wear in g of Police Id entification Cards and badges  at Administra tion Building 
9. Police Id entification Cards and badges on P romotion 
10.  Surrender of Police Identification Card s and badge s 
11.   Replacement of Police Identification Cards and badges  
12.  Destruction of  Police  Identification  Car ds and badges



3 TRINIDAD AND  T O B AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
Police Identification  Cards and Badges  S .O. No. 7 
  
Issue of Police 
Identification 
Card s and 
Badges  
Use of Police 
Identification  
card s and 
badges  
Misuse of 
Police 
Identification  
Card s and 
Badges  
Carrying of  
Police 
Identification 
Card s and 
Badges  
 
1. (1) Police Identification C ards shall be issued to all police officer s  
and shall bear the photograph  in uniform,  number,  rank  and name of the 
person  to whom it is issue d (see Appendix 1).   
(2) Such cards shall bear the signatu res of the Commissioner  
of Police or his  designa te, and the officer to whom the card is 
issued.  
(3) All Police Identification Cards shall be reissued after a 
period of 10 years where an officer still holds the same rank.  
 
         (4) Badges shall be issued to every police officer .  
 
         (5) The badges shall be of two types to distinguish between First and    
Second Division Officers. Gold -coloured badges shall be worn by First 
Division Officers and Silver -coloured  by Second Division Officers  (see 
Appendix 2) . 
 
         (6) The badges shall consist of the following:  
a. The name of the organization - Trinidad and Tobago Police 
Service (TTPS) . 
b. The Police Service logo . 
c. The full name of the officer (inclusive of the initial of a 
second/middle name) . 
d. The officer’s regimental number . 
  
 
2. Police Identification   Cards  and badges    are to  be used for the 
purpose  of identifying such persons as bona fide officers of the Service  in 
the execution of their duties . The cards  and badges  shall be shown to 
members of the public whether in plainclothes or in uniform.  
 
     
3. Police Id entification Car ds and badges shall not be used for 
any purpose other tha n as mentioned in par agraph 2 above. 
 
 
4. (1) Police Id entification  Car ds and badges  shall  be  car ried  on  the  per 
son  of  all p o l i c e  of f i c e rs ,  w h e t h e r  o n o r  o f f  d u t y .   
 
(2) Uniformed police officers shall wear their badge on such part of their uniform     
and “Orders of Dress” as designated by the Commissioner of Police. 
 
(3) Police officers attired in plainclothes (with the exception of those assigned to 
highly sensitive and covert units), shall wear their badge on such part of their 
civilian dress as designated by the Commissioner of Police. 
 
 
 
 



4 TR IN IDAD AND TOBAGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
S .O. No. 7 Police Identifi cat ion Card s and Badges 
 
Security of 
Police 
Identification 
Card s and 
badge s 
Loss/ Theft  of 
Police 
Identification 
Card  and 
Badge  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. Police officer s must ta k e extreme car e t o ensure the absolute safety and 
security of their P o l i c e  Id entification Car ds and badges, to preserve 
them against loss .     
 
 
6. (1) A Police Officer shall immediately report the loss / theft  of his 
Police Identification Card and/or Badge as soon as such loss / theft  is 
discovered, giving details of the circumstance surrounding the loss / 
theft . 
 
(2)  Such reports are to be made to the Second Division Officer -in -
Charge of any Station/Section/Unit where the loss / theft  occurred 
an d shall be recorded in the Station Diary.  
 
(3)  The Second Division Officer -in -Charge of the  
Station/Section/Unit receiving the report  is responsible for the 
immediate submission of a report to the Officer -in - Charge of the 
Division/Branch/Section/Unit  
 
(4)  The Of ficer - in - Charge  of the Division  /Branch  /Station  
/Section /Unit where the report is received shall , within 48 hours 
up on receipt of the report, forward a copy of the report to:  
 
i.  the Deputy Commissioner of Police with responsibility for 
Administration  for publication in the Departmental Orders ; 
ii.  the Disciplinary Officer for investigation; and ; 
iii. The Officer -in -Charge of the Division  /Branch  
/Station  /Section /Unit  where the police officer 
concerned is attached.  
 
 
(5)  Where the loss / theft  occurred is not in the Station/Branch/Unit 
where the police officer concerned is attached, he shall submit a 
written report to the Officer - in - Charge  of Division  / 
Branch  / Section /Unit where he is attached, within forty -eight (48) 
hours.  
 
 
 



5 TRINIDAD AND  T O B AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
Police Identification  Cards and Badges  S .O. No. 7 
  
Wearing of 
Police 
Identification 
Cards and 
Badges at 
Administration 
Building  
 
 
 
Presenta tion 
of 
Police 
Id entification 
Car ds and 
Badges 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Police 
Id entification 
Car ds and 
Badges on 
Promotion 
7. Police Identification Cards and badges shall  be presented a s 
follows: 
(a) to all First Division Officers and Inspectors  on their  
visit s or insp ect ion s. 
(b) to t he Second Division Officer -in -Cha rge of a Sta t ion/ 
Branch/ Section / Unit  or any other senior o f f i c e r 
p r e s e n t, during the daily  inspect ion of  the 
Id entification Cards and badges of officer s under their 
supervision.   An ent ry shall be made to this effect in the 
Sta t ion Diary . 
(c) to t h e Sent ry on ent ry to any Police building or 
compound, whether an officer is in uniform or not. 
 
8. 8. All officers shall, on ent ry to police buildings, present their Police 
Id entification Car ds and badge s to the Sent ry at the main 
entra nce and shall be prominently displayed as designated by the 
Commissioner of Police.  
 
 
9. 9.(1) When a  police officer  is to be issued with a new Police 
Identification Card and/or badge in accordance with section 1 ( 3) above or  
promoted  t o a  higher  ra n k , the  old  card and badge  shall be ha nded   
in   to  the  Officer -in -Cha rge  of  the Photography Sect ion . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) The Officer-in-Charge of the Photography Section shall transmit the 
new photograph to the Officer -in -Cha rge of t h e  Division /Bra nch / 
Section /Unit  to which the officer is attached for insertion in his   
Divi sion al   Person al   File   a nd   a not her   sent   to t h e  Deputy 
Commissioner with responsibility for Administration to be inserted in his 
Persona l File. I n the case of a First Division Officer, the photograph shall 
be sent to the Commissioner of Police, to be inserted in his Personal File. 
 
 
 



6 TR IN IDAD AND TOBAGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
S .O. No. 7 Police Identifi cat ion Card s and Badges 
 
Replacement  of 
Police 
Identification 
Car ds and 
Badges  
Surrender of  
Police  
Identification 
Car ds  and 
Badges  
Destruction of 
Police 
Identification 
Car ds and 
Badges  
 
10. Police  officer s  who have  retired, resigned,  h a v e  b e e n  
   dismiss ed, interdicted,  susp ended, or otherwise discharged shall  
fort hwith sur render their Police Id entification Cards and badges to t h e 
Officer -in -Cha rge of the Division /Bra nch/ Section / Unit to which they 
were last att ached— 
(a) In the ca se of First Division Officers, the Officer -in - 
Cha rge of the Division /Bra nch/ Section / Unit shall 
submit the Police Id entification Cards and badges to the 
Commiss ioner of Police . 
(b) I n t h e ca se of    S econ d   Divi sion   Officers,   t he Police 
Identification Cards and badges s hall be submitted to 
the Deputy Commiss ioner with responsibility for 
Administration. 
(c) In the case of a suspended or interdicted officer, the Police 
Identification Card and badge  shall be held by the Quarter 
Master Stores and reissued if the officer resumes duty. 
(d) Officers -in -Ch a rge of Divisions  /Bra nches m u s t 
ensure tha t these instr uctions are com plied with. 
  
 
11. If a Police Id entification Car d and/or badge is defaced, mu tilated or 
dam aged,  such Identification   Car d and/or badge must  be immediately 
submitted, along with a report , in order tha t a new  Police 
Id entification  Card and/or badge  can  be obtained. In the  case of a 
Second Division Officer, the report shall  be submitted to the Assistant  
Commiss ioner with responsibility for the Division/ Branch/ Section/Unit and 
i n  t h e  c a s e  o f  a First Division Officer, to the Commiss ioner of 
Police. 
 
12. The Officer -in -Charge of the Photography S ection 
shall submit at  the end of each month , all non -serviceable 
cards and badges  to the Deputy Commiss ioner with 
responsibility for Administra tion for destruction.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



7 TRINIDAD AND  T O B AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
Police Identification  Cards and Badges  S .O. No. 7 
  
Appendix 1- Trinidad and Tobago Police Service Identification Card 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




8 TR IN IDAD AND TOBAGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
S .O. No. 7 Police Identifi cat ion Card s and Badges 
 
 
Appendix 2- Trinidad and Tobago Police Service Identification Badge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




9 TRINIDAD AND  T O B AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
Police Identification  Cards and Badges  S .O. No. 7 
  
 
 
