 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO POLICE SERVICE  
 
 
STANDING ORDERS 5 
 
LE AVE 



2 TR IN IDAD AND TOB AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
S .O. No.   5 L eav e 
 
 
Leave 
 
 
 
SE CTION 
ARR AN GE ME N T   OF   SE CT ION S 
1. Interpretation 
2. Types of Leave 
3. Vacation Leave 
4. Casual Leave 
5. Conference  Leave 
6. Study Leave 
7. Sick /Maternity Leave 
8. P aternit y  Leave 
9. Procedure for Gran t in g of Bereavement Leave 
10.  Registra tion of Officer ’s Spo use/Gua rdian /War d 
11.  Sp ecial Leave  an d Vacation Leave Eligi bility 
12.  Procedure for gran t in g of Vacation Leave  
13.  Leave Pass to be issued  
14.  Notification of Leave Approval 
15.  Mont hly Retur n of Leave gran ted 
16.  Failur e to r eport o ff leave  
17.  Cancellation an d Recall  to duty  



3 TR IN ID AD AND TOB AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
S .O. No.   5 L eav e 
 
Interpretation  
 
1. In this Standing Order: 
“Annu al Vacation  Leave” refer s t o tha t period of absence for which 
a police officer is eligi ble after the  completion of one year of service. 
Bereavement Leave ” refers to tha t period of absence gran ted t o a 
police officer du e t o the deat h of a member of the officer’s 
immediate family.  
“Casual Leave ” refer s t o those  periods of casual absences with prior 
approval of the Commissioner of Police, may be granted to police officers in 
accordance with Regulations 80 of the Police Service Regulations Chapter 
15:01 as amended. 
“Cohabitant” means a woman who is living with the officer in  a 
bona fide domestic relationship for a period of not less than five 
years imme diately preceding the pregnancy. O nly one woman shall 
be considered as a cohabitant” provided that the officer had 
previously registered the name of such cohabitant with the 
Commissioner of Police. In accordance with Regulation 96 (2) of 
the Police Service Regulations, Chapter 15:01 as amended.  
“Compensatory Leave” refers to leave granted in lieu of public 
holidays.  
“Compensatory T i m e Off ” refers  to  t h a t   period of  a b s e n c e 
granted to a Second Division Police Officer in lieu of payment for 
any excess hours performed during a work week.  
“Conference Leave ” refers to that period of absence gran ted t o a police 
officer u p t o four teen (l4) consecutive days per annu m for the 
purpose of at tending conferences, both locally and abroad, as 
delegates  of an  app ropriate recognized  Ass ociation. 
“Duty Leave” refers to tha t period of absence gran ted t o a         
police officer who has bee n selected to represent the Trinidad and Toba 
go Police Service in a Sp ort in g, Educational or Cultur al event.  
“Grat uitous Leave” refer s to tha t period of absence  granted by  the  
Commiss ioner  of  Police  t o  m ember s  of  the  Service  for 
extr aordina ry duties meritoriously per formed in connect ion with    
major  celeb ra tion s  or   even t s ,   e.g. ,   Car nival   celeb ra tion s ,       
Elect ion s, et c. 
“Immediate family ” means  the officer’s sp ouse, child, parent s, siblings 
and if the officer had registered his gua rdian, war d o r  c o h a b i t a n t ,  
w i t h the Commissioner of Police  such guardian, ward or 
cohabitant.  
“Leave” refers to tha t period of absence where a police officer is not 
rostered or required for any par ticular duty. 
 
 
 
 



4 TR IN IDAD AND TOB AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
S .O. No.   5 L eav e 
 
Types of Leave 
“Maternity Leave” refers to that period of absence granted                                
to a female police o fficer before a nd after the birth of her child ” 
“Paternity  L e a v e ” r e f e r s   to t h a t period   of a b s e n c e gran ted to 
a ma le police officer du e t o the pregnancy  of his wife or registered 
cohabitant at or about the time  of delivery . 
“Off Duty  Leave” refer s t o tha t period of absence gran ted to a police 
officer in any one da y when he is not required for duty. 
“Rest Da y Leave” refer s t o tha t period of absence gran ted to a police 
officer in relation t o a work wee k. 
Special Leave refers to that period of absence granted to a police 
officer who has been selected to represent Trinidad and Tobago in a 
Sporting, Educational or Cultural Event.  
“Study Leave” refer s t o tha t period of absence gran ted to police 
officers to pursue courses of study  with or without pa y. 
 
2. Member s  of  the  Service  are  eligi ble  for  the  following types of leave: 
i. Off Duty 
 
ii. Rest Da y 
 
iii. Com pen sat or y 
 
iv.  Grat uitous 
 
v. Vacation 
 
vi. Casual 
 
vii. Conference  
 
viii. Duty 
ix. Special 
 
x. Study/Scholarship 
 
xi. Sick 
 
xii. Maternity  
 
xiii. Paternity  
 
xiv.  Bereavement  
 
 



5 TR IN ID AD AND TOB AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
S .O. No.   5 L eav e 
 
Study Leave 
Vacation Leave 
Casual Leave 
Conference 
Leave 
 
3. The entitlement to annual vacation  leave is in accordance with   Regulation 
76  (1) of the Police Ser vice Regulations, Chapter  15:01 as am ended. 
 
 
4. Casual Leave shall be deducted from the entitlement, as specified in Regulations 
76 (1) above, for the officers grade to a maximum  of:  
a) Fourteen working days if he holds an office in the First Division; or 
b) Seven working days if he holds an office in the Second Division 
Notwithstanding regulation 75 (1), the Commissioner of Police may apply 
subregulation (1) to meet the case of an officer who has not completed a full year of 
service. The leave so granted shall not exceed the total amount of vacation leave that 
the officer can be considered as having earned on a pro rata basis at the time of the 
grant of such leave.  
 
5. Police Officers app lying for “Conference  Leave” shall      submit at least 
two (2) wee k s in advance, documentation  from the Ass ociation indicating : 
i. the natu re of the conference; 
 
ii. the stat us of the officer a s a delegate of the 
Association ; an d 
iii. the  sp ecific period of the conference an d the 
travel  time required. 
 
 
 
6. (1) Police officer s shall be gran ted leave of absence to pursue a course of 
study on a full time basis with pay (Full Pay Study Leave) or without pay 
(No Pa y Study Leave) with the approval of the Commissioner of Police. 
 
(2)  Police   o fficers   who  have   served   more  tha n three (3)  years  
continuous  service  are  eligible  to  apply  for  Full Pay or No  Pay 
Study Leave.  A Police Constable who has not completed his 
probationary period is not entitled to Full Pay or No Pay Study Leave.  
 
(3)  An application for Full Pay or No Pay Study Leave shall be  
submitted to the Commissioner of Police at least three (3)  months 
prior to the commencement date of  the programme of  study.  
 
(4) An app lication for the gran t of Study Leave   shall contain : 
 
 
a) a letter of accepta nce from the institution  of study  sta t in g: 
 
 the pr ogram me to be pursued; 
 



6 TR IN IDAD AND TOB AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
S .O. No.   5 L eav e 
 
 the commencement an d completion dates 
of the   programme  of study; 
 
 the qualification to be obtained after completion ; 
 
 the fees payable  in respect of each 
semester of the programme  of study ; 
 
b) a letter from the approved Accreditation Body , certifying 
tha t the institu tion and proposed p r o g r a mme of study are 
accredited; 
 
c) a Cur riculum Vita e; 
 
d) whether the  applicant has any outstanding High Court 
Matters/Disciplinary charges pending; 
 
e)  the most recent pay slip; 
 
f) the most recent Performance Appraisal report; 
 
g) in the case of No Pay Study Leave, an affidavit of financial 
support  or a recent bank statement ;  
 
h)  in the case of Full Pay Study Leave, the 
rationale/justification for course of study (i.e. 
relevance to core policing function) as well as its 
alignment to the strategic objectives of the Trinidad 
and Tobago Police Service .  



7 TR IN ID AD AND TOB AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
S .O. No.   5 L eav e 
 
 
(5) (a) Police officers on Full Pay or No Pay Study Leave abroad sha ll inform 
the Commissioner  of Police through the  Diploma tic Miss ion in the 
count ry of study of his    mailing a d d r e s s an d  an y  subsequent  cha nge  
of    add ress in tha t count ry. 
 
(b) Where there is no D i p l o m a t i c M i s s i o n in the  count ry of study , 
the officer shall  send h i s  m a i l i n g  a d d r e s s  a n d  a n y  
c h a n g e  t h e r e o f ,  directly to  the Commissioner  of Police . 
 
(6)  Within one  (1)  month  of  the  commencement  of Full Pay or No 
Pay Study Leave , a p olice officer is required to submit  
correspondence indicating that  he   has  authorized   the institution   
of   study   to   release   any   academic  results / transcripts/progress 
report s at the end of each semester as follows:  
- w h e r e  s t u d i e s  a r e  p u r s u e d  l o c a l l y ,  to 
the Commissioner of Police; o r   
-  w h e r e  s t u d i e s  a r e  p u r s u e d  a b r o a d       
through the Diplomatic  Mission  . Where there is 
no Diplomatic Mission  in the country of study , t he 
officer shall send it directly to the Commissioner 
of Police . 
 
(7)  Police officers who require a change of study programme and / or 
institution shall submit an application to the Commissioner of Police , 
for consideration,  at least three (3) months in advance  of the 
commencement of the new programme . 
(8)  Police officers shall not be allowed to obtain employmen t during approved 
periods of No Pay Study Leave, except wit h the permission of the 
Commissioner of Police.  
 
 
(9) (a) Police Officers on Full Pay or No Pay Study Leave  shall be 
granted no more than two (2) extensions to  a maximum of two (2) 
years to enable the officer to complete the programme of study .  
 
(b) Extensions shall  not be granted to pursue further qualifications. 
In such a case, a new applica tion shall be submitted by the 
police o fficer.  
 
(10)  The grant of Full Pay or No Pay Study Leave will terminate  at the 
end of the programme for wh ich the study leave was approved. Upon 
termination of the leave the police officer shall  report for duty:   



8 TR IN IDAD AND TOB AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
S .O. No.   5 L eav e 
 
Sick/ Maternity 
Leave  
Paternity Leave  
 In the case of studies within the Caribbea n 
-with in two  (2) week s; 
 In all other cases -with in one (1) month.  
 
(11) (a)  Police o fficers who desire to resume duty before the end of the 
approved period of Full Pay or No Pay Study Leave shall apply to  
the Commissioner of Police for approval.  
 
(b) Applications should be submitted at least one (1) month prior to 
the proposed  date of  resumption.   
 
(12)  A Police Officer may be granted time off to pursue a course of study 
on a part time basis with the approval of the Head of the Division/ 
Branch / Section/ Unit to which he is attached.  Applications for such 
time off shall be accompanied by:  
 a letter of accepta nce from the institution  of study  sta t in g 
the pr ogram me to be pursued and its commencement an d 
completion dates; 
 the course schedule/ timetable. 
 
7. To qualify for Maternity Leave you must be  employed  by the Trinidad and Tobago 
Police Service  for a period of not less than twelve months.  In accordance  with the 
Maternity Protection Act Chapter 45:57 Section 8 (1).  
 
 
8. (1) A ma le police officer shall be  e l i g i b l e f o r p a t e r n i t y leave of four  (4) 
work in g days at or about the t i m e  his wife or registered cohabitant  gives 
birt h. 
 
(2) A male police officer shall be eligi ble for paternity leave   as mentioned 
at (1) above subject  to the following conditions: 
 
(a) An application is made to the Commissioner  of 
Police  with a medical certificate sta ting the 
expected dat e of deliver y; 
 
(b) in the case of his cohabitant, tha t the na me was              
registered with the Commiss ioner of Police prior to the 
app lication for such leave  in accordance with 
Section 16 of this Standing Order . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



9 TR IN ID AD AND TOB AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
S .O. No.   5 L eav e 
 
Proced ure 
fo r gra nting 
o f 
Bere a ve men t  
Lea ve  
 
Re gis tra tio n 
o f O ffice r’s 
Sp o use / 
G ua rd ia n / 
War d 
Special 
Leave and 
Vacation 
Leave 
Eligibility  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1 Regulation 
 
 
 
 
 
9. Police officer s ma y be gran ted bereavement leave subject   to the 
following condition s: 
 
(a) In the case where the  deat h occur s: 
 
(i) I n  Trinidad   a n d   Toba go- th ree (3) work in g days ; 
 
(ii) Ou ts id e  of  Trinidad  a n d  Toba go  a n d  t he off icer  
actu all y  t r a v e l s abroad -five  (5 ) w or k in g days; 
 
(b) In the case of  guardian  (s) and/or ward(s) or cohabitant 
h e had previously registered their  na mes with  the  
Commissioner of Police.  
 
10. An officer i s  r e q u i r e d  t o  register with the Commissioner of 
Police, t h e  na mes of t h a t officer’s  spouse, gua rdian / ward or 
cohabitant , in order to be eligible for bereavement and paternity 
leave . 
 
   11.  (1) Leave gran ted for the purpose of “Conference Leave”, “Sp ecial 
Leave” an d “Duty Leave” shall not  affect  a  police  officer’s  
entitlement to  vacation leave. 
(2) Second Division Officers shall be eligible for annual vacation leave 
as follows: 
 
1Grad e Years of   
Service 
   Working Days  
1-9 1-10 28 d ays 
1-9 Over 10  35 days 
76 (1) Police Service Regulations 2007 



1
0 
TR IN IDAD AND TOB AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
S .O. No.   5 L eav e 
 
Procedure for 
granting of 
Vacation  Leave  
 
    12.   (1) App lications for  leave by Second Division Officers , with                    
the except ion  of “Off Duty  Leave” an d  “Rest Da y  Leave”,     shall           
be ma de in  writ in g an d  shall indicate the dura tion  of the leave  an d  the  
app lican t ’s  intended  address,  whether local or foreign . Such application 
shall be submitted  not later than 31 st  October in the preceding year to 
facilitate the preparation of the leave roster for the year ahead.  
 
(2) App lications for leave by a First Division Officer shall 
be addressed to the Commissioner of Police. 
 
(3) Second   Division  Officer s  shall  app ly  for  leave  in  the 
following manner : 
(a) Where the application  for leave is for fourteen days  or  
less and is to be sp ent in the country , such application 
should be addressed to the Officer -in - Charge  of 
the applicant ’s Division /Bra nch/ Section/ Unit. 
(b) Where the application is in excess of fourteen days, it 
shall be addressed to the Deputy Commissioner of Police 
with responsibility for Administration.  
(c) Applications with respect to any period of leave to be spent out 
of the country shall be addressed to the Deputy Commissioner 
of Police with responsibility for Administration. 
 
(4) In the case of an emergency an officer in his application must 
state the urgency of the circumstances for such leave: 
1) The Officer - in - Charge of a Division on receipt of the 
application may allow a Second Division Officer under his 
command to proceed out of the country on leave.  
2) An officer senior in rank to a First Divison Officer on receipt of 
the application may allow a First Division Officer to proceed 
out of the country on leave. 
Where a First Division Officer grants permission under subsections (1) 
and (2) above he shall report such fact immediately in writing to the 
Commissioner of Police.



1
1 
TR IN ID AD AND TOB AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
S .O. No.   5 L eav e 
 
 
 
Leave pass to 
be issued  
 
 
 
 
Notification 
of Leave 
Approval  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Monthly 
return of 
leave granted  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Failure to 
Report Off 
leave 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cancellation 
and Recall  
13. Every officer who is granted leave shall prior to proceeding on 
leave, be issued with a Leave Pass which bears the address at which 
he proposes to spend such leave the duration of the leave and the 
Division/ Branch/ Section/ Unit from which the leave was taken. 
 
14.  An officer who has applied for va cation leave within the specified 
time shall, subject to the exigencies of the service, be informed not less than 
one month before his vacation leave is due to commence, whether or not his 
application has been granted. 
 
 
15. A Mont hly Retur n of all leave for periods of four teen days or 
less gran ted in Divisions/Bra nches / Sections / Units  shall be 
forwarded to the office of the Deputy Commiss ioner of Police with 
responsibility for Administration, within seven days  for the purpose of 
updating the relevant records. 
 
16. It shall be the duty of all Second Division Officers  -in - Charge of 
Stations / Sections / Units to report to the Officer- in - Charge of such 
Division /Branch/Section / Unit any Second Division Officer who has failed 
to report for duty three days  after the expiration of such leave. The First 
Division Officer -in -Charge of Division /Branch/ Section / Unit shall report 
this information within two days to the Deputy Commissioner of Police with 
responsibility for Administrat ion, and to the First Division Officer  with 
responsibility for Finance Branch. 
 
17. (1) The Commiss ioner of Police ma y, with the exception of 
S i c k Leave, Bereavement Leave,  Paternity Leave and M a t e r n i t y 
Leave , if the exigencies of the Service so require: 
(a) Cancel an y leave gran ted; 
(b) Restrict leave; 
(c) Recall to duty, any Police officer who proceeded on leave 
at anytime  before the expiration of such leave.  
Where a Police Officer has bee n recalled from vacation 
leave, he shall  be eligi ble for the unexpired period of 
his vacation leave. 
 
  
 
 
 