 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TRIN IDAD AND TOB AGO P OLICE SE RVICE 
 
S TAND IN G ORD ERS 17  
 
STATION DIARY 



2 TR IN ID AD AND TOB AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
S .O. No.   17  Stat ion Diary 
 
 
 
Station Diary 
 
 
ARR AN GE ME N T OF SE CT ION S 
 
SE CTION 
 
1. Interpretation 
2. Issue  of 
3. P utt in g into  U se 
4. Keeping  of Sta t ion Diary  
5. U se of Sta t ion Diary  Colum n s 
6. Entries  to be Ma de in the Sta t ion Diary  
7. Sta ndard Entries  
8. Ha n dover 
9. Guidelines to the Preparation of the Handover  
10.  Number of Diaries to be issued  
11.  P roduction  In Cour t  
12.  Extr act s 
13.  Digitization and Retention



3 TR IN ID AD AND TOB AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
Stat ion Diary S .O. No.    17  
 
 
1. In this Standing Order: 
 “Register” refers to a written or electronic record of events, 
transactions and information.  
 
                          “Sta t ion Diary” refers to an official register wherein entries       
relating to reports, occurrences, observations at Sections / 
Branches/ Stations / Units,  and the movements of persons, 
arms and ammunition and other articles are chronologically 
recorded.  
 
2. Station Diaries shall be issued by the Police Quartermaster Stores to 
Branches/Sections /Stations/Units.  
 
3. When a new Sta t ion Diary is to be put into  u se, it shall be the    Put t in g into 
resp onsibility of the Second Division Officer -in -Cha rge of a Police   Use 
Sta t ion /Bra nch /Sect ion /U n it to ensure tha t — 
 
(a) On the outside of the front cover of the Sta t ion Diary, 
the words “Date Commenced” with the date on which 
the Sta t ion Diary was put into use as well as “Date 
Completed” are written . The serial nu mber of  the  
register  is  also  to  be w ritten  on  the cover  of the 
said  register, after  the register has bee n recorded in the 
“Completed Book s” register. 
 
(b) E ach  page of t he St ation Diar y is nu mb ered 
consecuti vel y;  and  
 
(c ) A signed certificate i s entered on th e last pa ge 
of the Statio n Diar y showin g that e ach p a ge  is 
correctly nu mbered . This c ertificate is to  be 
sign ed b y the  officer who  chec ke d a nd/or  
nu mb ered the  pa ges.  
 
4. It shall be the duty of a police officer when engaging the u se        Kee ping of 
of a Sta t ion Diary to com ply with the following instr uctions: 
 
(a) Ma k e t h e  e n t r y i n  b l u e  o r  b l a c k i n k i n  a  n e a t , 
c l e a n  a n d  l e gi b l e  ma n n e r .   
 
(b) Entries in which firearms and ammunition are 
mentioned, the description of the firearms and 
ammunition are  to be recorded in red ink.  
 
(c)  Num ber the first entry after midnight from “one” 
and continue consecutively and chronologically.   
  Sta t ion Diary 
Interpretation 
Issue of 



4 TR IN ID AD AND TOB AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
S .O. No.   17  Stat ion Diary 
 
 
(d)  When writing the date and:  
i.  the entries for the day continue but the 
page ends, write the full date in  capital 
letters in  red  ink  within the first two 
lines of the next page  as set out in 
Appendix A . 
ii.  the final entry of the day ends on the 
last line of the page, draw two parallel 
red lines along the first two lines of the 
next page and write the full date in 
capital letters in red in k within  as set 
out in Appendix B . 
iii.  the entries for the day ends within the 
page , draw two red lines along the next 
two horizontal red lines and write the 
full date in capital letters in red ink 
within  as set out in Appendix C . 
 
(e)  Mak e an accurate entry of th e report  in the 
Station Diary and on the prescribed General 
Incident Report Forms, issue a prescribed 
receipt to the person ma king the report and give 
details  on the next  course of action.   
 
(f)  Whenever an entry is incorrect, do not tamper  
(overwrite etc.)  wi th it. Instead m ake another 
entry  referencing the initial entry and : 
(i)       add the missing particular s or   
(ii)  delete the incorrect particulars or  
(iii)  cancel the incorrect entry.  
 
(g) Do not erase entries or parts of entries or use correction fluid/ 
tape or any other substance to obliterate or tamper with 
entries. 
(h) Whenever an ent ry relates t o a mat ter of par ticular 
importa nce and it is of the view of the police officer 
making the ent ry tha t it should be  drawn  to the attention  
of supervisory staff, draw two perpendicular lines  in 
red ink on the left side against the ent ry in the colum n 
“Natu re of Record”.  
 
(i) Any r e f e r e n c e m a d e to a police officer  shall include 
his  number, ra nk and s u rna me.  
 
(j) Notwithstanding the provision of (i) above, writ e t h e full 



5 TR IN ID AD AND TOB AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
Stat ion Diary S .O. No.    17  
 
n a m e of  all  other p e rson s in  c a p i t a l l e t t e r s; care 
must be ta ken to ensure accur acy in sp elling. When 
there is doubt, persons should be requested to sp ell their 
na mes. 
 
 
(k) Do not    leave   blank   sp aces   and/or   lines   in   the 
colum n “Natu re of Record”. The un used portion of any 
line shall be scored off by means of a wavy line. 
 
(l) Do not stick or glue pages together. 
(m)  Where pages are unintentionally left out, a diagonal line shall 
be drawn in red ink across the blank pages from top to bottom 
and the words “OMITTED IN ERROR” written in red along the 
line.   
 
 
 
5. The Sta t ion Diary has five (5) colum n s, which shall be used    U se of 
as follows: 
 
(a) In Colum n 1  headed “Nu mb e r”- En ter t he nu mber of 
the ent ry in a consecutive man ner. 
 
(b) In Colum n 2 headed “Reference Number”  - Enter  the 
reference numbers  of corresponding entries made in  that 
diary and  other registers . 
 
(c) In Colum n 3 headed “Subject” - Enter  the  caption and 
class ification of the ent ry. The  General Occurrence (GO) 
number should be added as soon as it becomes available. 
 
(d)  In Colum n 4 headed “Hour” - En ter the actu al time 
the report was ma de. 
 
(e) In Colum n 5 headed “ Natu re of  Re c or d” - En ter t he 
n a t ure of the  report  a n d d e t a i l s of  the  occur rences, 
observations or movements . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sta t ion Diary 
Colum n s 
 



6 TR IN ID AD AND TOB AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
S .O. No.   17  Stat ion Diary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. It shall be the duty of a police officer to enter the  following    
in a Sta t ion Diary: 
 
(a) Occurrences at a Sta tion/ Bra nch/ Section/ Unit. 
 
(b) (i) The name, address  and contact information of th e  
person  making a report ; the time, date and place of the 
incident including a detailed report ; and the serial 
number of the prescribed receipt issued to the person 
making the report.  
 
(c) (i)  The details of a report received by a telephone 
or by telecomm unication system. 
 
(ii) Where such reports  are  to  be  desp atched  to 
another  destina tion ,  a  cross -reference  of  the 
register in which the mess age was desp atched 
must be entered in the Sta t ion Diary. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Entries to be 
made in Station 
Diary 



7 TR IN ID AD AND TOB AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
Stat ion Diary S .O. No.    17  
 
 
(d) The ar rival and departu re of any visitor, civili an or 
police, the purpose of the visit and action taken or 
contemplated in connect ion with such visit. 
 
(e) The whereabouts of personnel att ached to a Sta tion 
/Bra nch /Sect ion /Unit. 
 
(f) The receiving and ha nding o v e r of  an y i t e m of  
property and/or exhibits and/or any other thing from one 
person and/or sta t ion to another. 
 
(g) The detention of a per son at a Section/ Branch/ Sta t ion/ 
Unit an d the r eason for his detention; the physical 
condition of  the person so detained noting his condition 
when he was brought in and also the items which he 
had on his person . His departu re is to be noted, giving 
similar details. 
 
(h) Any pronounced cha nge in the weat her, e.g. the commencement 
and cessation of rain.  
 
(i) The disruption and resu mptio n in water and 
electricity supp ly, telephone service and Closed Circuit 
Television (CCTV) System  at the Station / Branch/ 
Section/ Unit . 
 
(j) Any other mat ter which ma y com e t o the at tention of 
the sent ry during the course of his duty. 
 
 
 
Standard  
Entries  
7. (1) It shall be the resp onsibility of the Second Division Officer 
- in -Cha rge of the Reception Area  to ensure tha t the f o l l o w i n g  
instr uction s are com plied with : 
 
(a) An entry shall be made at 6:00a.m.with respect to the 
hoisting of the flags and at 6:00 p .m. with respect to the ir 
lowering. 
(b) Between 6.00 a .m. and 7.00 a.m. each da y, the clock at 
the Sta tion/ Branch / Section / Unit shall be synchronized 
with the time at E999 Command Centre  and an ent ry 
made in the Sta tion Diary to this effect. 
(c) Between 6.00 a .m. and 7.00 a.m. each day, the telephone, 
wireless set and standby generator at the Sta tion/ Branch/ 
Section/ Unit  shall be tested and an ent ry to the effect 
ma de in the Sta t ion Diary. 



8 TR IN ID AD AND TOB AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
S .O. No.   17  Stat ion Diary 
 
 
(d) At 7.00 a .m. each da y, an ent ry showing the brief 
par ticulars of the weat her shall be entered in the 
Sta tion Diary a s follows: 
(i) Visibility—Good or Poor ; 
(ii) Win d—Strong, Slight or Calm ; 
(iii) Ra in —Heavy or light. 
 
(2) The   S econ d   Divi sion   Officer -in -Cha rge   of   
t he Sta t ion/ Branch/Section/ Unit shall: 
(i) Examine the ent ries in the Sta t ion Diary/ 
Diaries at least once ever y da y and certify 
not later tha n 8.00  a .m. by an e n t r y in 
each  Sta tion   Dia ry  as    shown    
hereu nder. He shall indicate tha t he has read 
all ent ries in the books and registers and 
examined the GOIR Forms and all receipt books. 
The certificate shall also include a list of 
discrepancies discovered and action ta ken 
by him or instr uctions given to have them 
corrected. 
(ii) En ter in t he S ta t ion Dia ry be fore 
10 .00 a.m.    each    day, a    certificate 
indicating th at a check was  made  of all 
conducted energy device  (e.g. T asers ), and 
firear ms and  ammunition  issued    to 
Sta tion/ Branch/ Section/ Unit. Such ent ry 
shall be made in red ink. 
 
(3) Where the Second Division Officer -in -Cha rge of   
t he Sta t ion/ Branch/Section/ Unit is  un avoidably 
absent, t he next senior Second Division Officer 
will  make the check and sign b o t h certificates. 
The Second Divi sion Officer -in -Cha rge shall be 
resp onsible for checking all ent ries made in his 
absence and an entry to this effect made in the Station 
Diary. 
 
 
SPE CIME N OF SE CO N D DIVISI ON OFF ICE RS CE RT IF ICATE 
 
“I hereby certify having examined all ent ries made in this Diary 
for the past t went y-four (24) hours with the corresp onding ent ries 
ma de in other books, registers, G O I R  F o r m s  a n d  a l l  r e c e i p t  
b o o k s  at Station/ Section / Unit , an d I have found them correctly 
written or found the following discrepancies and gave c ert ain 
instr uction s” (which ever is ap plicable). 
 
 
Signat ure Rank  



9 TR IN ID AD AND TOB AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
Stat ion Diary S .O. No.    17  
 
 
 
 
Ha ndover 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guidelines t o 
the 
pre paratio n  
of the 
Ha ndover 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N umber of 
Diaries to be 
iss ued 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Production in 
Cour t  
8. When the Second Division Officer -in -Cha rge of the Reception 
Area  is relieved, an ent ry shall  be made in the Sta tion Diary to 
tha t effect and signed by both the relieved and the relieving Second 
Division Officer. No Second Division Officer shall handover the duties of 
the Reception Area unless all incident report forms have been written up 
for Serious Crimes, Minor Crimes and all other incidents reported during 
his tour of duty. 
 
 
The handover should be written up in the following form 
9.   I   ha nded   over    t he   du ties   of   t he   Reception Area     
to No. ........... . Ran k........ . Name........................................ . with  the 
keys  and   all  Govern ment   Property  on   hand  including  the  
itemised property in the  property  chest ,  if an y,  in  an y  case  of 
tasers, firear ms and ammu nition indicate nu mber,  type  and  
quan tity, Cash On  Hand (write  the amoun t in words as well as 
figures). All coun ter foil receipt books checked and  found  corr ect, no 
receipt pages found miss ing. In the case of prisoners in custody, sta t 
e the nu mber, name(s) and the o f f e n c e s (s) w i t h w h i c h t h e y  
a r e c h a r g e d/  d e t a i n e d. Animals impounded, G O IR  f o r ms  
f o r  a l l reports of serious crime, minor crime, road traffic accidents and 
all other incident reports. 
 
10. It shall be the resp onsibility of the Office-in -Cha rge of a 
Division / Bra nch / Section / Unit shall determine the number of  
Sta tion Diaries t h a t  may be used at  a Sta t ion /Bra nch/ Section / 
Unit at  a n y one  time  having  regard to the natu re and volume of 
work at  the Sta t ion /Bra nch/ Section / Unit. 
 
11. The Sta tion Diary is a Depart ment al and privil eged record; 
neither it, nor any extr act from it may be produced in Cour t, except 
by order of the Presiding Judge / Master/ Magistra te and/or in 
accordance with the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Rules , 
or at the direct ion of a First Division Officer. No unaut horized 
person will have access to it, and no copy of any ent ry will be ma de 
except on the instr uction of such an Officer. 



1
0 
TR IN ID AD AND TOB AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
S .O. No.   17  Stat ion Diary 
 
 
12. No police officer without reasonable excuse shall ma k e or have in his  
poss ess ion an extr act  from  a  Sta t ion  Diary  without  the  
permiss ion  of the Inspector -in -Cha rge of  the Station/ Bra nch/ 
Section/ Unit  where such diary is located. 
 
13. The Station Diary shall be digitized by the department responsible for Information 
Communication and Technology and both the electronic copy and the actual Station 
Diary shall be retained indefinitely in accordance with Section 42 of the Freedom of 
Information Act at a location designated by the Commissioner of Police.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Digitization 
and 
Retention 
Extracts 



1
1 
TR IN ID AD AND TOB AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
Stat ion Diary S .O. No.    17  
 
 
 
 
Appendix A 
 
 
 
 
NUMBER REFERENCE 
NUMBER 
SUBJECT HOUR NATURE OF RECORD 
  MONDAY 22ND JANUARY, 2024 
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     



1
2 
TR IN ID AD AND TOB AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
S .O. No.   17  Stat ion Diary 
 
 
 
Appendix B 
 
 
 
 
 
NUMBER REFERENCE 
NUMBER 
SUBJECT HOUR NATURE OF RECORD 
  MONDAY 22ND JANUARY, 2024 
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     



1
3 
TR IN ID AD AND TOB AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
Stat ion Diary S .O. No.    17  
 
 
 
Appendix C 
 
 
 
NUMBER REFERENCE 
NUMBER 
SUBJECT HOUR NATURE OF RECORD 
     
     
     
  MONDAY 22ND JANUARY, 2024 
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     