 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO POLICE SERVICE  
 
S TAND IN G ORD ERS 12  
 
U N IFORM AND E QU IP ME N T: 
ISS U E, REP LACE ME N T AN D IN SPE CT ION 



2 TR IN ID AD AND TOB AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
Uniform and Equipment: 
Issue, Replacement  and Inspection  S .O. No.   12  
 
 
Uniform and Equipment: 
Issue, Replacement and Inspection  
 
 
ARR AN GE ME N T OF SE CT ION S 
 
SE CTION 
 
1. Interpretation 
2. Issue of Uniform and Equipment  
3. Kit Book 
4. Keeping  of Kit 
5. Replacement  of Kit 
6. Retur n in g of Kit 
7. Kit Inspections  
8. Reissuance of Kit to an officer who resumed duty after suspension 
 



3 TR IN ID AD AND TOB AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
Uniform and Equipment: 
Issue, Replacement and Inspection  S .O. No.   12  
 
Issue of 
Uniform and 
Equipment  
Keeping of Kit  
Interpretation  
 
1.  “Kit Book” refers to a register in which shall be recorded uniform and equipment 
/accessories issued to a police officer.  
“Kit” refers to uniform   and   equipment / accessories issued to a police officer. 
“Register” refers to a written or electronic record of events, transactions and 
information. 
 
2.  ( 1 )Uniform  an d  equipment /access ories  shall  be  iss ued  t o           
              
police officers  on entry into  the Police  Service, in accordance  
with the directions of the Commiss ioner of Police a s set out in              
App endix “A” of this Or der. 
 
(2) (a)   Uniform and equipment /access ories sha ll be iss ued at 
the Police Quartermaster Stores and shall bear the 
regiment al number of the receiving officer . 
(b) Police officers shall, on  receipt of u n i f o r m and 
equipment /access ories sign the register kept at the 
Police Quartermaster Stores for tha t purpose. 
 
 
3. (1) Each Kit Book shall be iss ued in duplicate an d shall bear the Kit Book 
regiment al nu mber  of the police officer  concerned. 
 
(2) The original Kit Book shall be kept at the Police Quartermaster Stores; 
and the duplicate shall be issued to the police officer concerned upon his entry 
into the Police Service. 
 
(3) Where it is not expedient for each police officer to poss ess 
a du plicate Kit Book, at least the original shall be iss ued and kept 
at the Police Quartermaster Stores. 
 
(4) Upon presenta tion of the Kit Books  and unserviceable  item(s) 
of kit to the Storekeeper, officers shall be iss ued with the necessary 
replacement item(s) of kit. 
 
(5) All ent ries in the Kit Book shall be ma de by the St or e- 
keeper an d signed by the officer receiving the kit. Er asures shall not 
be  ma  de.  All corrections  ma  de by  the  Storekeeper in the Kit Books 
shall be initialed by the officer receiving  the item(s) of  kit and the 
Storekeeper. 
 
4. (1)  Kit iss ued to police officers shall be maint ained in a serviceable 
condition and secured against loss / theft  and/or damage. 
 
(2) (a)   It e m( s ) o f kit  shall not be left for lau nder in g 
at any place for a period exceeding fifteen day s. 



4 TR IN ID AD AND TOB AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
Uniform and Equipment: 
Issue, Replacement  and Inspection  S .O. No.   12  
 
 
(b) Howe ver, where such item(s) of kit is left for a period 
exceeding twenty day s, it shall be reclaimed by the 
senior o fficer with responsibility for Fina nce Bra nch 
and shall be retur ned to the   Police Quartermaster  St ores   
an d   disciplina ry a c t i o n ta ken against the officer 
concerned . 
 
 
Replacement  
of Kit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Retur n in g of 
Kit 
5.(1)  (a) The  officer  whose  item (s) of kit  has   bee n   lost , 
stolen, destroyed or dam aged, shall submit a writ ten  repor t 
within forty eight hours of him becoming aware, to  the  Officer -
in -Cha rge   of    t he Division /Bra nch/ Section/ Unit to which 
the officer is attached . 
(b) The Officer -in -Cha rge of the Division /Bra nch / Section/ 
Unit shall within forty eight hours of receipt of the 
officer’s report , forward the report with h is           
recommendations to the Officer -in -Cha rge of            
“Fina nce Bra nch” to have such item(s) of kit           
replaced. 
 
(2) The Officer -in -Cha rge of “Fina nce Branch ” on receipt of  such 
recommendation and report of the Officer -in -Cha rge of   the Division 
/Bra nch/ Section /Unit shall make arrangements to have the item(s) of kit 
replaced and such loss subsequently published in the Departmental Orders. 
 
(3) Concurrent with the submission of the report at 5 (1) (b), the 
Officer- in- Charge of the Division/Branch/Section/Unit, shall 
forward the officer’s report to the Disciplinary Officer for the 
appropriate action. 
(4) In the case of unserviceable item(s) of kit, such item shall be 
returned to the Police Quartermaster Stores for replacement. 
 
 
6. (1) Whenever a police officer resigns, retires, is susp ended or 
for any other reason is discha rged from the Ser vice,  kit 
iss ued to him shall be retur ned to the Police Quartermaster 
Stores within seven (7) days of such occurrence . 
 
(2) (1) (a) In the case of abandonment  or  deat h  of  a  police 
officer, the Officer -in -Cha rge of the Sta t ion in whose 
district  such  officer  last  resided,  shall  retrieve  all 
kit  from  his   residence(s)  with in  seven (7) days of 
such occurrence . 
(b) The receiving  officer  s h all   issue   a   receipt   in 
tri plicate to the person from whom items of kit are 
retrieved. 
(c) This receipt shall cont ain a detailed list of the  items of 
kit received an d both par ties are required to affix their 
signatu res thereon . 



5 TR IN ID AD AND TOB AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
Uniform and Equipment: 
Issue, Replacement and Inspection  S .O. No.   12  
 
Kit Inspection  
 
(d)  Th e original receipt shall be handed ove r to the 
person from whom such k it were received.     
(e) Within seven (7) days of retrieving the kit referred to 
at paragraph (a), the receiving o fficer shall return such 
kit and the duplicate receipt to  the Police 
Quartermaster Stores.  
(f) The triplicate receipt shall be retained by the 
receiving officer for his records.  
 
(2)  In instances where item(s) of kit has been left at 
Station the receiving officer shall comply with the instructions 
outlined at (2) (1) (b) -(f). An entry to this effect sh all be made 
in the Station Diary.  
 
(3) In the cases above, the Superintendent -in -Cha rge of 
Division /Bra nch /Sect ion/ Unit  shall ensure tha t all instructions 
outlined in this section are compiled with.  
 
7. (1)  It shall be the duty of First Division Officer s an d/or Senior      
Second Division Officers to car ry out kit insp ections by ma k in g a  
physical check of all items of kit iss ued to Second Division Officers 
under their comma nd. At such insp ections, the Insp ecting Officer must 
ensure tha t — 
(a) items of k it are in a serviceable condition ; 
(b) t he  items  of  kit  p resented  a re  in  agree men t with the 
ent ries ma de  in  the  Kit  Book  (where the duplicate Kit 
Book is available); 
(c) if there are any items of kit un accoun ted for, an 
explana tion  i s   given in writing  for their                 
un availability within 24 hours of the inspection ; 
(d) the duplicate  Kit  Book  of Second  Division  Officers  
present at Kit Insp ection i s made available to the 
Insp ecting Officers, so tha t the items of kit can be verified 
with the ent ries in the Kit Book . 
 
(2) Upon completion of the Kit Insp ection, the Insp ecting 
Officer shall  i n q u i r e  i n t o  a n y  discrepancy which may be found 
and may initiate disciplina ry proceedings against the o f f i c e r  
c o n c e r n e d , if the circumsta nces warran t it. 
 
(3) The Inspecting Officer   shall submit a report to the Head of 
the Fina nce Bra nch th rough the Head of the Division /Bra nch/ Section/ 
Unit, requesting replacement in cases where this becomes necessary . 
 
(4) Kit Inspection shall be held at least twice annu ally in ever y 
Division/ Branch /Section/ Unit.   The Head of the Division/ Branch/ 
Section/ Unit shall have all officer s under his comma nd present at a 
Kit Inspection. 



6 TR IN ID AD AND TOB AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
Uniform and Equipment: 
Issue, Replacement  and Inspection  S .O. No.   12  
 
 
1. Reissuance of 
Kit to an Officer 
who resumed 
duty after 
suspension 
 
 
 
8. An officer who has resumed duty after a period of suspension shall, upon receipt 
of his resumption letter , proceed to the Police Quarterm aster Stores to be 
reissued with the appropriate items of kit.



7 TR IN ID AD AND TOB AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
Uniform and Equipment: 
Issue, Replacement and Inspection  S .O. No.   12  
 
 
Appendix A



8 TR IN ID AD AND TOB AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
Uniform and Equipment: 
Issue, Replacement  and Inspection  S .O. No.   12  
 
 



9 TR IN ID AD AND TOB AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
Uniform and Equipment: 
Issue, Replacement and Inspection  S .O. No.   12  
 
 



1
0 
TR IN ID AD AND TOB AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
Uniform and Equipment: 
Issue, Replacement  and Inspection  S .O. No.   12  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*The items listed are by no means exhaustive. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 