TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
STANDING  ORDERS  10
CRIMINAL PROSECUTION AND PROCESS



Criminal Prosecution and Process
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
PART I
Criminal  Prosecution
SECTION
1. Criminal Prosecution
2. Police Complainant
3. Laying of Information
4. Citing of Witnesses
5. Submission of Files
6. Attendance at Orderly Room and Court
7. Refreshing of witnesses
8. Complainants/Preserve Order
9. Exhibits
10. Updating Records
11. Court Prosecutor
12. Court Prosecutor—Appointment of
13. First Division Officers Conference with Court Prosecutors
14. Functions of Court Prosecutors
15. Presentation of Court Cases
16. Presentation of Cases by Legal Private Practitioner
17. Officer in Charge of Division/Branch or Superintendent Court and
Process—Submission of
18. Complaint against Legal Private Practitioner
19. Complaint Proceedings against arrested Police Officer
20. Submission of Report
21. Laying of Charge against Police Officers
22. Police Officers Cross Charged
23. Police Officers privately charged
24. Arrest of members of the Defence Force
25. Prosecution of members of the Defence Force and the Police Service
26. Prosecution and Criminal Proceeding—Public Officers
27. Postponement and Final Determination—Submission of
28. Withdrawal or Substitution of Information—Approval for
29. Summons or Writ—Service of
30. Bail Act 18/94
31. Authority for granting Bail by Police Officers
32. Conditions under which bail can be granted
2 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 10 Criminal Prosecution and Process



Criminal  Prosecution—Continued
SECTION
33. Responsibility of the Police Officer granting Bail
34. Circumstances under which Bail can be opposed
Appeals Against Magisterial Decisions
35. Appeal
36. Approval for Lodging an Appeal
37. Procedure for Lodging an Appeal
PART  II
Process
38. Process
39. Forms of Process
40. Summons
41. Types of Summons Commonly Served
42. Summons Register
43. Mode of Service
44. Proof of Service
45. Unserved Summons
46. Notice
47. Responsibility of the Second Division Officer-in-charge with respect to
“Notices”
High Court Process
48. High Court Process
Indictment, High Court Notices and Writ of Subpoena
49. Issue of Indictment and High Court Notices
50. Writ of Subpoena
51. High Court
52. Service of Indictment and High Court Notices
53. Service of Writ of Subpoena
54. Return of Affidavit Re Indictment High Court Notices/Writ of Subpoena
55. Unserved Indictments/High Court Notices/Writ of Subpoena
Writ of Habeas Corpus
56. Writ of Habeas Corpus
57. Purpose for a Writ of Habeas Corpus
58. Application for a Writ of Habeas Corpus
59. Register for Application Writ of Habeas Corpus
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 3
Criminal Prosecution and Process S.O. No. 10



4 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 10 Criminal Prosecution and Process
PART III
Warrant
SECTION
60.Warrant
61. Warrant History Sheet
62. Types of Warrants 
63. Registers
64. Guidelines to Police Officers Executing Warrants
(1)
FIRST INSTANCE WARRANT
(2) TIME ALLOWED COMMITMENT WARRANT
(3) SEARCH WARRANT
(4) AFFILIATION/MAINTENANCE WARRANT
(5) REMAND WARRANT
(6) DISTRESS WARRANT
(7) EJECTMENT WARRANT
65. Proviso
66. Return of Warrants
67. Transfer of Warrants
68. Guidelines to Transferring of Warrants
69. Loss of Warrant
70. Information on warrant to be entered on computer
71. Duties of Data Entry Clerk
PART  IV
Movement  of  Detained  Persons
72. Interpretation
73. Movement of Detained Persons
74. Duties of Escort Personnel
75. Transport of Female Prisoners
76. Transport of Juveniles
77. Duty of Second Division Police Officer in charge of escort
78. Responsibility of Divisional Commanders and the Officer in charge of Court
and Process Branch 
79. Duty of the Second Division Officer
80. First Division Officer in charge of Court District
81. Second Division Officer in charge of stations
82. Duty of Police Officers to prevent detained persons from escaping custody
83. Duty Re: escape prisoners
84. Duty of First Division Officer Re: escape prisoners
85. Duty of the Head of Division/Divisional Commander



PART  I
Criminal Prosecution
1. “Criminal Prosecution” refers to the instituting of criminal
proceedings against an offender in a Court of Law. The presenta-
tion of such cases may be undertaken by:
(a) Court Prosecutors (Police Officers)
(b) State Attorneys 
(c) Attorneys in private practice where the fiat of the
Director of Public Prosecutions is obtained.
2. “Police Complainant” refers to a Police Officer who institutes
criminal proceedings against any person on behalf of the State.
3. (1) Police Officers who prefer a charge against any person
shall prepare an “Information” in triplicate and must ensure that
such “Information” is checked and initialled by an officer not
below the rank of Corporal, before such “Information” is laid at
the Magistrate’s Court.
(2) The information laid shall be dealt with as follows:
(a) The original and duplicate remain with the Court.
(b) The triplicate is kept by the complainant for inclu-
sion in his Case File.
4. Every Police Officer who is desirous of citing witnesses in
support of the prosecution, shall do so by recording the names and
addresses of such witnesses at the back of the “Information”. On
no account must witnesses be cited at the front of an
“Information”.
5. (1) (a) The Police Complainant shall submit his Case File
within one week after the institution of criminal
proceedings.
(b) Where a Police Complainant experiences difficulty
in having a file completed within the stipulated one
week, the     complainant shall submit the file with
a covering note to the Head of Division/First
Division Officer-in-Charge, explaining such
difficulties and request an extension.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 5
Criminal Prosecution and Process S.O. No. 10
Criminal
Prosecution
Police
Complainant
Laying of
Information
Citing of
Witnesses 
Submission
of Files



(c) Where an Officer-in-Charge receives the incomplete
file and covering note, he shall grant to that com-
plainant, an extension not less than one week or
such time as it may be prudent to have the file
completed.
(ii) In Charge Cases:
(a) Police Complainants in “Charge Cases” shall present
to the Court Prosecutor at Orderly Room an Interim
Case File.
(b) The File shall contain a summary of evidence,
information, notice to the prisoner and a criminal
record report (if possible).
(c) The File is to assist the Court Prosecutor in his
presentation of the case. However, should the matter
be adjourned, the Police Complainant shall comply
with the instructions contained in paragraph 5 of
this Order.
6. (1) (a) Police Complainants shall attend Court Orderly
Room from 7:15 a.m. on each Court date.
(b) Police Complainants shall be properly attired when
attending Court Orderly Room and Court according
to the instructions laid down in S.O. 6 (Attire and
Appearance).
(c) Police Complainants shall present their exhibits
when attending Court Orderly Room and Court.
Where the exhibit is of such a nature that it is
impractical to do so, the complainant shall make
arrangements for the exhibit to be viewed by the
Court Prosecutor.
(2) (a) Police Officers who are complainants/witnesses in
Court matters shall attend Court on each date of
hearing until the final determination of such
matters.
(b) Where a matter has been adjourned/postponed in
the absence of a police officer who is a com-
plainant/witness, he shall ascertain the new date of
hearing from the Court Prosecutor assigned to the
Court in which the matter was called.
6 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 10 Criminal Prosecution and Process
Attendance at
Orderly Room
and Court



7. All Police Complainants shall refresh/brief their witnesses
before the start of the trial/inquiry.
8. Police Complainants are required to assist the Court. They
shall “Preserve Order” in the precincts of such Courts, and shall 
call the names of complainants, defendants and witnesses.
9. “Exhibits” are property that have come into the possession of
the Police to be preserved for the presentation as evidence in a
Court of Law.
(a) Exhibits in the custody of the Property Manager shall
be collected by the complainant who shall be respon-
sible for its production at Court Orderly Room and
Court.
(b) Exhibits are to be returned to the Property Manager
daily by the complainant after each Court hearing of
the matter.
(c) The Complainant shall report the dates of postpone-
ment/conclusion to the Property Manager.
(d) Exhibits in the possession of the Police, where the
case has been completed, shall be returned to the
owner or dealt with as the Court instructs.
(e) In cases where property is to be returned to the
owner, the complainant shall assist the Property
Manager in doing so.
10. The Complainant shall be responsible for reporting the
results of his cases after each hearing, including postponements to
the Station Sentry and the updating of the relevant registers at
Station.
11.“Court Prosecutor” refers to a Police Officer who presents
cases in Summary Courts on behalf of the Commissioner of Police
and leads evidence in the Coroner’s Court.
12. The Officer in charge of Court and Process Branch and
Heads of Divisions, shall appoint suitable Police Officers to
perform the functions of Court Prosecutors.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 7
Criminal Prosecution and Process S.O. No. 10
Refreshing of
witnesses
Complainants
Preserve
Order
Exhibits
Updating
Records
Court
Prosecutor
Appointment
of Court
Prosecutor



13. The Officer in Charge of Court and Process Branch and
Heads of Divisions or a First Division Officer designated by him,
shall hold a Conference on a daily basis before the sitting of
Courts to discuss with the Court Prosecutors, matters arising
from their Orderly Room.
14. Court Prosecutors shall—
(a) Hold “Court Orderly Room” by discussing the
evidence of the cases with the complainants and
develop strategies for the presentation of such cases.
(b) Detail Police Officers to preserve order in and
within the precincts of the Court.
(c) Where there is a breach of S.O. 6 on “Attire and
Appearance”, the Prosecutor shall take disciplinary
action.
(d) Where matters have been dismissed, the Prosecutor
is required to report giving reasons therefore:
(i) If in Port-of-Spain to the Officer-in-Charge
Court and Process Branch; and
(ii) Other Divisions to the Heads of Divisions.
(e) Bring to the attention of Head of Divisions or First
Division Officer in Charge Court and Process
Branch, any matters which may be of interest to the
proper management of the Court.
(f) Inform the Officer in Charge of Service, Inspection
and Complaints Unit, through the Officer in Charge
of the Division/Branch, within forty-eight (48) hours
of the results of any criminal proceedings in which a
Police Officer was either a defendant or an accused.
15. It shall be the duty of Heads of Division or a First Division
Officer in Charge Court and Process Branch to apply to the
Director of Public Prosecutions through the Assistant
8 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 10 Criminal Prosecution and Process
First Division
Officers
Conference
with Court
Prosecutors
Functions of
Court
Prosecutors
Presentation
of Court
Cases



Commissioner “Crime” for State Attorneys to prosecute in the
following instances:
(a) murder, manslaughter cases;
(b) cases involving defamatory libel, sedition, pervert-
ing or attempting to pervert the course of justice;
(c) any case which is of national importance or has
attracted great public concern;
(d) treason and cases akin thereto;
(e) riot cases under Riot Act, Chap. 11:05;
(f) cases involving public officials under Corruption
Act, Chap. 11:11;
(g) cases under the Exchange Control Act, Chap. 79;
(h) trial in a Magistrate’s Court in which a Police
Officer or a member of the Defence Force is the
defendant;
(i) replies to legal submissions; persons charged with
the misappropriation of Government funds;
(j) all matters for which the Director of Public
Prosecutions’ “fiat” is required before prosecution.
16. (1)Where a legal private practitioner has a “fiat” from the
Director of Public Prosecutions to prosecute a matter or be associ-
ated with the Police in the presentation of a criminal matter in
court, the Court Prosecutor assigned to the Court in which the
matter is being heard, must withdraw from the presentation of
the matter in which the legal private practitioner has a “fiat” to
prosecute.
(2) However, the Court Prosecutor must continue to follow
the proceedings and must report to his Head of Division or Officer
in Charge of Court and Process, any dispute or difference which
may arise between the Police and Counsel whether it relates to:
(a) witnesses or a matter affecting the condition of the case; and
(b) a compromise or settlement without the approval of
the Director of Public Prosecutions.
17. Where there is a complaint against a legal private practi-
tioner as it relates to paragraph 16(2), the Officer in charge of
Division/Branch or Superintendent “Court and Process” shall sub-
mit a report to the Assistant Commissioner “Crime” or Assistant
Commissioner “South” within two days of the receipt of the report.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 9
Criminal Prosecution and Process S.O. No. 10
Presentation
of cases by
legal private
practitioner
Officer in
charge of
Division/
Branch or
Superinten-
dent Court
and Process—
Submission of



18. The Assistant Commissioner “Crime” or Assistant
Commissioner “South” shall forward the report at paragraph 17
to the Director of Public Prosecutions within three days of its
receipt.
19. Where a Police Officer is arrested for any offence, it shall be
the duty of the Arresting Officer to inform the Area Officer or
Inspector of the facts surrounding the arrest on the day of the
arrest and withhold the laying of any charge until instructions
have been received.
20. (1) It shall be the duty of the area Officer or Inspector in
receipt of the report at paragraph 19, to submit the facts
surrounding the arrest to the Head of the Division/Branch, on the
day of the arrest.
(2) Upon receipt of the report at paragraph 20(1), the Head
of the Division/Branch shall inform the Assistant Commissioner
responsible for that area, who shall direct the action to be taken.
21. (1) No criminal charge shall be laid against a Police Officer
by another Police Officer junior in rank, except where otherwise
directed.
(2) The complainant in a charge against a Police Officer
shall be responsible for collecting from the Court and serving all
summonses on the defendant.
(3) The complainant shall be responsible for collecting and
serving all summonses on prosecution witnesses in connection
with the said case.
(4) The result of all charges against Police Officers,
including the postponement and determination of the case, shall
be reported by the Court Prosecutor to his Divisional or Branch
Superintendent and the reason for postponements must be stated.
(5) The Divisional/Branch Superintendent must report
immediately, the information received at paragraph 21(4) to the
Deputy Commissioner.
10 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 10 Criminal Prosecution and Process
Complaint
against Legal
Private
Practitioner
Complaint
proceedings
against
arrested
Police Officer
Submission of
Report
Laying of
Charge
against Police
Officers



Police Officers
Cross-
charged
Police
Officers
privately
charged
Arrest of
members of
the Defence
Force
Prosecution of
members of
the Defence
Force and the
Police Service
Prosecution
and Criminal
Proceeding re
Public
Officers
22. (1) Where a Police Officer is cross-charged as a result of an
incident arising out of the execution of his duty, it shall be the
duty of the Police Officer cross-charged to submit to the Officer in
Charge of the Division/Branch—
(a) a report stating clearly the facts of the incident; and
(b) the file pertaining to the case.
(2) The Officer in Charge of the Division/Branch shall sub-
mit a copy of the Case File as at (b) to the Assistant Commissioner
“Crime” for transmission to the Director of Public Prosecutions,
seeking legal representation for the officer cross-charged.
23. Where a Police Officer is charged privately for a criminal
offence, it shall be the duty of the Police Officer to inform the
Commissioner of Police in writing through the Officer in Charge
of the Division/Branch and attach a copy of the Summons or Writ
which imposes the responsibility on him to attend Court.
24. Where a member of the Defence Force is arrested for any
offence, it shall be the duty of the Second Division Officer in
Charge of the Station at the time to:
(a) inform the Head of Division/Branch immediately, of
the arrest.
(b) withhold the laying of any charge until instructions
are received from the Officer in Charge of the
Division/Branch.
25. In all cases where members of the Defence Force and the
Police Service are charged before the Court, request shall be made
in writing by Divisional Superintendents through the Assistant
Commissioner “Crime” for prosecution to be done by a member of
the Director of Public Prosecution’s Staff.
26. (1) Prosecution and criminal proceedings against a Public
Officer shall be instituted by the Police without prior approval of
the Director of Public Prosecutions, except where otherwise
stated in law.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 11
Criminal Prosecution and Process S.O. No. 10



(2) It shall be the duty of a Police Officer who institutes
criminal proceedings against any of the persons mentioned in
paragraph 26(1) to report it in writing to the Assistant
Commissioner “Crime” for transmission to the Director of
Personnel Administration and Head of Department concerned.
27. (1) It shall be the duty of the Court Prosecutor to inform
the Officer in Charge of the Division/Branch concerned about the
postponement or the final determination of the case, who shall in
turn inform the Assistant Commissioner “Crime”.
(2) The Assistant Commissioner “Crime” shall inform the
Director of Personnel Administration and respective Head of
Department of the final determination of a case against a Public
Officer mentioned in paragraph 26(1) of this Order.
(3) In the case of a traffic offence, the Assistant
Commissioner “Mobile” shall be responsible for informing the
Director of Personnel Administration and the respective Head of
Department of the prosecution and determination of the case.
28. (1) An information which is before a Court shall neither be
withdrawn nor substituted without prior approval of the Director
of Public Prosecutions.
(2) Where all information which is before the Court  is to
be substituted or withdrawn, the Court Prosecutor is to submit
the relevant case file together with a report to the Head of the
Division/Branch concerned.
(3) Upon receipt of the documents at paragraph  (2), it
shall be the responsibility of the Officer in Charge of the
Division/Branch to forward such documents with his recommen-
dation to the Assistant Commissioner “Crime” to obtain the advice
of the Director of Public Prosecutions.
12 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 10 Criminal Prosecution and Process
Postponement
and final
determina-
tion—submis-
sion of
Withdrawal
or substitu-
tion of
information—
approval for



29. (1) Whenever a Summons or Writ is served on a Police
Officer arising out of matters referred to at paragraphs 22 and 23
of this Order, he shall—
(a) endorse on the Writ, the time and date it was served
and by whom in the following manner:
Served on me 
at ......................................................... a.m./p.m. 
(time)
on ........ by ...........................................................
(Date)                      (Name of person who served the Writ)
................. ..........................................
(Date) Signature of Police  Officer
Receiving Writ
(b) forward immediately a Summons or Writ together
with a detailed report relating to the incident to the
Officer in charge of the Division/Branch/Section/
Unit.
(2) The Officer-in-Charge of a Division/Branch shall submit
immediately the documents mentioned at (b) above to the
Assistant Commissioner “Crime”.
(3) The Assistant Commissioner “Crime”, upon receipt of the
Summons or Writ, shall immediately submit—
(a) the summons to the Director of Public Prosecutions;
(b) the writ to the Solicitor General with supporting
documents.
30. “Bail” refers to the discharge of an arrested person upon his
entering into a recognisance either with or without a surety to
appear before a Court of competent jurisdiction at a date, time
and place specified.
31. Police Officers of the substantive rank of Corporal or above
are authorised to grant bail to a person arrested without a
warrant for a Summary Offence, if it is not practicable to bring
such person before a Magistrate or Justice of the Peace within
twenty-four (24) hours after he was taken into custody.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 13
Criminal Prosecution and Process S.O. No. 10
Summons or
Writ—Service
of
Bail Act 18/94
Authority for
granting Bail
by Police
Officers



32. Police Officers before granting bail, shall satisfy themselves
of  the following conditions:
(a) that the offence committed, although summary, is
not of a serious nature;
(b) that the arrested person—
(i) has a permanent address;
(ii) does not appear violent or intoxicated;
(c) in the case of a person apparently under the age of
sixteen years, such person shall only be released on
bail, if the parent or guardian accepts responsi-
bility for his custody and subsequent appearance in
the Court.
33. It shall be the responsibility of the Police Officer granting
bail to do the following:
(a) prepare the bail bond in triplicate in accordance
with the specimen shown at Appendix “A” for a
reasonable amount not exceeding five hundred
dollars ($500);
(b) inform the prisoner of the date, time and Court of
appearance;
(c) request the signature of the prisoner on the bail
bond;
(d) in the case where the prisoner is under sixteen
years, in addition to his signature, request the
signature of his parent or guardian as a witness on
the bail bond;
(e) give the duplicate of the Bail Bond to the prisoner;
(f) release the prisoner on completion of the above at
paragraphs (a)–(d);
(g) attach the original bail bond to the “Information” on
which the charge is prepared;
(h) make an entry in the Station Diary indicating the
action taken.
14 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 10 Criminal Prosecution and Process
Conditions
under which
bail can be
granted
Responsibility
of the Police
Officer grant-
ing Bail



34. Police Officers objecting to bail, whether before a Judge in
Chambers, a Magistrate or a Justice of the Peace may do so using
all or any of the following reasons:
(a) The accused person/defendant has been previously
convicted for offences of a serious nature.
(b) That the accused/defendant is of a violent nature.
(c) That it is believed that if the accused/defendant
obtains bail he may: 
(i) commit other criminal offences;
(ii) commit an act of violence against any
Judge, Magistrate, Justice of the Peace,
Police Officer or a member of the Public.
(d) That the accused person is likely to abscond from the
country.
(e) That the virtual complainant in a charge involving
“Bodily Harm” is hospitalised or in a critical
condition.
Appeals Against Magisterial Decisions
35. “Appeal” refers to an application made to the Court of
Appeal in respect of a matter in which a Magistrate has refused to
convict or make an order against a defendant.
36. Appeals shall only be lodged at the Court with the approval
of the Officer in Charge of the Division/Branch or Court and
Process Branch.
37. Police Officers lodging an appeal shall comply with the
instructions hereunder:
(a) Notice of Appeal shall be made by an appellant to the
Clerk of the Peace before the expiration of the
seventh (7th) day after the Court’s decision.
(b) (i) If reasons for the appeal were not given in
writing when lodging the Notice of Appeal with
the Clerk of the Peace, such reasons shall be
given in writing within ten (10) days of the
pronouncement of the Court’s decision.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 15
Criminal Prosecution and Process S.O. No. 10
Circum-
stances under
which Bail
can be
opposed
Appeal
Approval for
Lodging an
Appeal
Procedure for
Lodging an
Appeal



(ii) In setting out the reasons for the appeal, the
appellant must be guided by section 132 of the
Summary Courts Act, Chap. 4:20.
(c) When calculating the days allowed for the lodging of
the Notice of Appeal or giving reasons for such
appeal, exclude the day on which the Court has
handed down its decision, as well as Saturdays and
Sundays and Public Holidays.
(d) Within forty-eight (48) hours after an appeal has
been lodged, the Officer-in-Charge of
Division/Branch or Court and Process Branch shall
submit the relevant Case Docket/Jacket to the
Assistant Commissioner “Crime” for transmission to
the Director of Public Prosecutions.
PART  II
Process
38. “Process” refers to the documents provided by law to secure
the attendance of a defendant/accused or a witness at a Court of
Law and includes an order instructing a person to do or abstain
from some act(s).
39. Forms of process available to Police Officers to secure the
attendance of a defendant/accused or a witness are:
(a) Summons
(b) Notice in Summary Matters
(c) Indictment by Director of Public Prosecutions
(d) High Court Notices
(e) Writ of Subpoena
(f) Writ of Habeas Corpus
(g) Warrants
16 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 10 Criminal Prosecution and Process
Process
Forms of
Process



40. “Summons” refers to a document issued by a Magistrate or
Justice of the Peace commanding a person to attend a Court of
Law at a time, date and place mentioned therein.
41.Types of Summonses served by Police Officers are as follows: 
(a) Defendant
(b) Witness
(c) Maintenance
(d) Affiliation
(e) Ejectment
(f) Summons to show cause.
42. It shall be the duty of the Second Division Officer in Charge
of Stations to—
(a) open and maintain a “Summons Register” in the
manner as shown at “Appendix B”;
(b) record the following in the “Summons Register”:
(i) All summonses received;
(ii) Summonses served;
(iii) Summonses returned to Court;
(iv) Summonses transferred to another Station;
(c) prepare a Summary at the end of each month in the
Register in the following manner:
No. of summonses brought
forward from previous month
....................
a. Add
No. of summonses received
during current month .................
Less: No. of summonses
returned to Court ........................
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 17
Criminal Prosecution and Process S.O. No. 10
Summons
Types of
Summons
commonly
served
Summons
Register



No. of summonses
served.................. 
No. of summonses transferred to
other Station ...............................
No. of summonses on
hand.....................
(d) certify, beneath the Summary, the correctness of the
entries made during that month;
(e) draw a red horizontal line beneath the certificate;
(f) at the beginning of the new month enter the month
and year in red ink;
(g) enter in red ink the summonses on hand from the
previous month.
43. Summonses to be served upon the person named therein
shall be effected in the following manner, not less than forty-eight
(48) hours before the date of hearing:
(a) by personal service;
(b) if he cannot be found, by leaving the original docu-
ment with an adult at the usual or last known
address.
44. Proof of Service is effected by preparing an affidavit, which
is written on the back of the duplicate of the Summons sworn to
before a Justice of the Peace or Magistrate and returned to the
Court of issue not less than twenty-four (24) hours before the date
of hearing.
45. Unserved Summonses shall be returned to the Court of issue
not less than forty-eight (48) hours before the date of hearing.
46. “Notice” refers to a document issued by a Court of Law
informing a defendant or witness of any changes made relevant to
a matter listed for hearing at that Court.
18 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 10 Criminal Prosecution and Process
Mode of
Service
Proof of
Service
Unserved
Summons
Notice



47. The Second Division Officer in Charge of a Station, on
receipt of a “Notice” shall enter it in the “Summons Register” at
Station and thereafter it shall be dealt with in the manner
provided for in the instructions dealing with summons.
High Court Process
48. (1) “High Court Process” will take precedence over all
other forms of process.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Second Division Officer in
charge of Process Sections to whom High Court Process is
directed, to ensure that:
(a) all such processes are served as early as possible;
(b) returns of service are submitted to the Registrar or
Assistant Registrar, as the case may be,
immediately after service.
Indictment, High Court Notices and Writ of Subpoena
49. Indictment by the Director of Public Prosecutions and High
Court Notices are issued in duplicate by a Judge/Registrar, com-
manding an accused person to whom it is addressed to attend the
High Court mentioned to answer a charge(s) on the date and time
specified in the said document.
50. A Writ of Subpoena is issued in duplicate by a
Judge/Registrar, commanding a witness to whom it is addressed
to attend the High Court mentioned and give evidence in a
matter on the date and time specified.
5l. (1)(a) It shall be the responsibility of the Second Division
officer in charge of a Process Section to open and
maintain a Register known as the “High Court
Process Register” in which shall be entered High
Court Notices, Indictments and Subpoenas received.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 19
Criminal Prosecution and Process S.O. No. 10
Responsibility
of the Second
Division
Officer in
Charge with
respect to
“Notices”
High Court
Process
Issue of
Indictment
and High
Court Notices
Writ of
Subpoena
High Court



(b) The Register shall be drawn up in accordance with
the specimen shown at “Appendix C”.
(2) All “Indictments” and “High Court Notices” must be
entered in red ink in the “High Court Process Register”.
(3) Writs of Subpoena must be entered in blue ink.
(4) Entries shall be recorded in the appropriate columns of
the Register indicating the following:
(a) Date of Service
(b) Return of Service
(c) Mode of Service.
52. Police Officers responsible for serving Indictment and High
Court Notices on accused persons shall effect service any day
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. at the address
mentioned in the document in the following manner:
(a) personally on the accused;
(b) if he cannot be found, by leaving the original
document with an adult at the address given;
(c) if an adult cannot be found at the address mentioned
in the document, service can be effected by leaving
the original document at the said address;
(d) service of the original document must be effected
four (4) clear days before the date of hearing;
(e) Notwithstanding the instructions given at
paragraphs (c) and (d) above, Police Officers
serving Indictment and High Court Notices shall:
(i) comply with any specific instructions given
on the document;
(ii) effect service of the document in accord-
ance with any special instructions received
by the High Court.
53. Police Officers responsible for serving a Writ of Subpoena shall
effect service on a witness two (2) clear days before the date of hearing
at the address given in the document in the following manner:
20 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 10 Criminal Prosecution and Process
Service of
Indictment
and High
Court Notices
Service of
Writ of
Supboena



(a) personally on the witness;
(b) if the witness cannot be located, by leaving the
original document with an adult at the address given;
(c) notwithstanding the general instructions given at
paragraphs (a) and (b) above, process officers are
advised to comply with  the instructions of the High
Court given in the service of the document.
54. When a duplicate of an Indictment, High Court Notice or a
Writ of Subpoena is returned to the Registrar, such duplicate
must be sworn to as an affidavit describing the mode of service of
each document.
55. Whenever an Indictment, High Court Notice or a Writ of
Subpoena cannot be served by the date of hearing mentioned in
the document it shall be the responsibility of the Process Officer
to return these documents to the Registrar with a note on each
document giving the reason for “non-service”.
Writ of Habeas Corpus
56. “Writ of Habeas Corpus” refers to an order of a Judge
directing the person named therein to produce or release the body
of a detained person immediately or on a date, time and place
specified therein.
57. Police Officers shall apply for a Writ of Habeas Corpus
whenever the attendance of a person sentenced to a term of
imprisonment or remanded in custody is required either as a
witness or accused/defendant in a Court of Law.
58. Police Officers applying for a Writ of Habeas Corpus shall:
(a) prepare the application on the prescribed form as
shown at “Appendix D”  “in Block Letters”;
(b) submit the application directly to the Officer in
charge of Criminal Records Office, at least four (4)
clear days before the date of hearing exclusive of
Saturdays, Sundays and Public Holidays. Such
application must not be sent by mail.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 21
Criminal Prosecution and Process S.O. No. 10
Return of
Affidavit Re
Indictment,
High Court
Notices/Writ
of Subpoena
Unserved
Indictments/
High Court
Notices/Writ
of Subpoena
Writ of
Habeas
Corpus
Purpose for a
Writ of
Habeas
Corpus
Application
for a Writ of
Habeas
Corpus



59. The Officer in charge of Criminal Records Office shall open
and maintain a Register known as a “Writ of Habeas Corpus
Register” as shown at “Appendix E” wherein shall be entered:
(a) particulars of the application;
(b) the granting and service of the Writ of Habeas
Corpus.
PART  III
Warrant
60. “Warrant” refers to a document issued by competent
authority, upon information on oath, directing a person or persons
named therein to apprehend a person or to enter premises to
conduct search or to seize articles mentioned therein.
61. “Warrant History Sheet” refers to a document containing
information likely to assist in identifying and locating the person
named therein and in which the steps taken to execute the
warrant are entered. A specimen is shown at “Appendix F”.
62. (i) Police Officers are required to execute warrants issued
by competent authority.
(ii) The most common types are:
(a) First Instance Warrant (F.I.)
(b) Time Allowed Commitment Warrant (T.A.C.)
(c) Search Warrant
(d) Affiliation/Maintenance Warrant
(e) Remand Warrant
(f) Distress Warrant
(g) Ejectment Warrant.
63. The Second Division Officer in charge of Process Offices and
Stations where appropriate shall—
(a) open and maintain a Time Allowed Commitment
Warrant Book, Affiliation/Maintenance Warrant
Book, Ejectment Warrant Book and First Instance
Warrant Index Book which shall be drawn up in
accordance with the specimen at Appendices
indicated hereunder:
22 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 10 Criminal Prosecution and Process
Register for
Application
Writ of
Habeas
Corpus
Warrant
Warrant
History Sheet
Types of
Warrants 
Registers



Time Allowed Commitment Warrant Book
“Appendix G”;
Affiliation/Maintenance Warrant Book “Appendix H”;
Ejectment Warrant Book “Appendix I”;
General Warrant Book “Appendix J”;
(b) (i) open and maintain an Index Register for each
of the following types of Warrant Books;
Time Allowed Commitment Warrant Book
Affiliation/Maintenance Warrant Book and 
First Instance Warrant Index Book;
(ii) the Index Register shall be drawn up in
accordance with the specimen shown at
“Appendix K” and shall reflect the person’s
name, surname, alias(es), serial number of the
warrant and warrant number;
(c) ensure that on the receipt of every warrant, a
record of the particulars is made in the relevant
Index and Warrant Book;
(d) record in the General Warrant Book all informa-
tion relating to warrants other than—
(i) Time Allowed Commitment Warrant;
(ii) Affiliation/Maintenance Warrant;
(iii) Ejectment Warrant;
(e) record all the particulars of a Bench Warrant in the
General Warrant Book in red ink;
(f) whenever a warrant is executed or transferred to
another Station, draw a red line through the entry
in the relevant Warrant Book;
(g) Submit to the Second Division Officer in Charge
of each Division/Branch/Section daily Warrant
execution/transfer/returned Information;
(h) at the end of the year, draw a diagonal red line
beneath the last entry in each Warrant Register
indicating along the said line the end of that
particular year;
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 23
Criminal Prosecution and Process S.O. No. 10



(j) at the beginning of each year, record the warrants
received, commencing with a new serial number for
that particular year. For example, 1/94, 1/95 as the
case may be. Warrants from the previous year shall
not be brought forward but shall be executed as
soon as practicable in the succeeding year.
64. Police Officers executing warrants shall observe the
following guidelines:
(1) First Instance Warrant
(a) It is issued for the apprehension of a defendant/
accused;
(b) It can be executed anytime and anywhere;
(c) The warrant need not be in their possession but
should be obtained and read to the prisoner at
the first opportunity;
(d) If it becomes necessary to use force when enter-
ing a building to arrest a person for whom a First
Instance Warrant has been issued, the arresting
officer must have the warrant in his possession;
Notwithstanding the above, the officer may only
resort to the use of force where admittance was
refused. [Section 108(5) of the Summary Courts
Act, Chap. 4:20];
(e) Where the warrant is not in the possession of the
arresting officer, the prisoner should be told of
the reason for his arrest;
(f) Upon arrest, the prisoner should be cautioned,
and anything said by him should he noted;
(g) On arrival at Station with the prisoner:
(i) an entry shall be made in the Station
Diary;
(ii) a copy of the charge is entered in the
Charge Book;
(iii) the prisoner shall be fingerprinted;
24 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 10 Criminal Prosecution and Process
Guidelines to
Police
Officers
executing
warrants



(h) Upon execution, the warrant must be “backed” in
the following terms:
“Executed by me the undersigned at
....................................... on..................................
(time) (date)
at..............................on........................................
(place) name of prisoner (alias)
by reading the warrant to him.
Signature of Executing Officer
Rank No.
(i) Where there is a First Instance Warrant for the
apprehension of a person who is undergoing a
term of imprisonment or is on remand at a State
Prison or Institution, the procedure hereunder
shall be— 
In the case of a prisoner on remand:
(i) submit a report to the Officer in charge
of the Division/Branch requesting that
arrangements be made with the Prison
or Institution Authority to have the
warrant executed;
(ii) the Officer in charge of the
Division/Branch, on receipt of the report
mentioned at paragraph (i) above, shall
communicate in writing to the
Commissioner of Prisons or Head of the
Institution through the Commissioner of
Police, requesting that arrangements be
made to have the warrant executed on
the prisoner at a particular time, date
and place;
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 25
Criminal Prosecution and Process S.O. No. 10



(iii) on the return of the communication
from the Commissioner of Prisons or
Head of the Institution indicating the
time, date and place arranged for the
execution of the warrant, the Officer in
possession of the warrant shall make
arrangements with the Clerk of Peace
in the District Court, to have a Justice
of the Peace accompany him in the exe-
cution of the warrant when the prisoner
will be remanded to attend Court,
in the case where the prisoner is undergoing
a term of imprisonment.;
(iv) a W rit of Habeas Corpus shall be
applied for, in order that the prisoner
shall be produced in Court on the date
fixed for trial.
(2) Time Allowed Commitment Warrant
(a) It is issued for the apprehension of a defendant/
accused who is in default of the payment of a fine
imposed by a court in lieu of a prison term;
(b) The warrant must be in possession of the Police
Officer executing it;
(c) It can be executed at any time and place;
(d) If the prisoner is able to pay the fine, he should
be taken with the warrant to the Court of issue or
to the Port-of-Spain Prison;
(e) If the prisoner is unable to pay the fine, he must
be conveyed to the Port-of-Spain Prison along
with the warrant;
(f) Under no circumstances must police officers
accept any payment of fines on a Time Allowed
Commitment Warrant;
26 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 10 Criminal Prosecution and Process



(g) Upon execution, the warrant must be “backed” in
the following terms:
“Executed by me the undersigned
at.............................. on ......................................
(time) (date)
at ..........…...................on ….................……........
(place) (name of prisoner) [alias(es)]
by reading the Warrant to him”.
.......................................................................
Signature            Rank            No.
(3) Search Warrant
(a) The “Search Warrant” authorises police officers
to enter and search the premises named in the
warrant for evidence, stolen articles or any other
thing unlawfully obtained;
(b) It can be executed at anytime, any day at the
place mentioned in the warrant;
(c) The warrant must be in the possession of the
Police Officer executing it;
(d) The warrant must be read to the owner/occupier
or in his absence any adult present before
beginning the search;
(e) If entry is refused, force can be used;
(f) The virtual complainant may accompany the
Search Party in order to assist in identifying the
items named in file warrant, however, if the
owner/occupier, or adult present objects to the
presence of the virtual complainant, he must be
made to leave the premises;
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 27
Criminal Prosecution and Process S.O. No. 10



(g) The Search Party should consist of an appropri-
ate number of officers to effectively search the
premises and to take persons in custody, where
necessary;
(h) When articles mentioned in the warrant are
found on the premises, persons present may be
taken into custody;
Upon execution, the warrant must be “backed” in
the following terms:
“Executed by me the undersigned in company
with .....................................................................
( No., Rank, Name of other Police Officers)
at...........on.............…at……................................
(time)             (date) (premises mentioned
in the warrant)
in the presence of.........................................……
(name of occupier or person present)
....................................... were found and seized”
(list items seized)
....……..............................................………..
Signature Rank No.
(4) Affiliation/Maintenance Warrant
(a) “Affiliation Warrant” is issued for the arrest of a
parent who is in default of child/children support
payment to the Court;
(b) “Maintenance Warrant” is issued for the arrest   of
a husband or wife who is in default of maintenance
payment made payable to the Court;
(c) The warrant must be in possession of the Police
Officer executing it;
(d) It can be executed at any time;
28 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 10 Criminal Prosecution and Process



(e) Upon execution, it must be read to the person
named therein;
(f) If upon execution of the warrant the prisoner is
willing to pay:
(i) collect the sum mentioned in the
warrants;
(ii) issue an official receipt;
(iii) release the person after making all the
relevant entries in the registers;
(g) The warrant and the sum collected shall be taken
to the Court of issue 
(h) If the prisoner is unable to pay the sum men-
tioned in the warrant, he should be taken to the
Court of issue unless other instructions are
endorsed in the warrant;
(i) On no account must Police Officers executing
Affiliation/Maintenance Warrant accept part
payment of the sum mentioned in the warrant;
(j) The warrant must be “backed” in the same manner
as that of a First Instance Warrant. However,
when payments are collected, the amount
collected and the receipt number must be quoted.
(5) Remand Warrant
(a) A Remand Warrant authorises the relevant
authorities to keep in custody the person named
in the warrant and to produce him before the
court on the date and time specified;
(b) Upon execution, the warrant must be “backed”;
(c) It shall be the responsibility of the Court
Prosecutors to ensure that Remand Warrants
are transmitted on the date of issue to the
Institutions in which persons remanded are to be
kept.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 29
Criminal Prosecution and Process S.O. No. 10



(6) Distress Warrant
(a) It is issued for the seizure and sale of moveable
property belonging to a person who is in default
of the payment of a fine imposed by the Court;
(b) The warrant must be executed between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on a day when the
Court is sitting;
(c) The Warrant must be in possession of the Police
Officer executing it;
(d) Forced entry is not permitted except it is
endorsed on the warrant;
(e) The wearing apparel and bedding of a person
named in the warrant and his family should not
be seized. The tools and implements of his trade
to the value of two hundred and forty ($240.00)
dollars should not be taken;
(f) If, upon execution the person against whom the
warrant is issued, is willing to pay the sum due
on the warrant, cost and charges incurred, the
execution of the warrant should cease, the total
sum collected and an official receipt issued;
(g) When “backing” this warrant, the action taken,
inclusive of the official receipt number if issued,
should be quoted;
(h) The warrant when returned to the Court of issue,
shall be accompanied by the sum collected on the
Distress Warrant minus expenses incurred in its
execution. In addition, there shall be attached a
statement of the cost and charges incurred in
respect of the execution of the warrant;
(i) Police Officers executing the warrant must com-
ply with all instructions endorsed on the warrant
and be conversant with the provisions laid down
under sections 82 and 85 of the Summary Courts
Act, Chap. 4:20.
30 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 10 Criminal Prosecution and Process



(7) Ejectment Warrant
(a) It is issued by the Court to expel a tenant from
premises named in the warrant;
(b) It must be executed between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on a day when the Court
is sitting;
(c) The executing officer must have the warrant with
him;
(d) It must be read to the tenant before the process
of ejectment begins;
(e) Reasonable force may be used to eject the tenant;
(f) (i) It must not be executed less than three (3)
days or more than seven (7) days after the
date of issue;
(ii) If the warrant could not have been
executed within the period mentioned, it
should be returned to the Court of issue
together with an explanation for its non-
execution;
(g) Upon execution, it must be “backed” and
returned to the Court of issue as early as
possible;
(h) The complainant must be present when the   war-
rant is being executed;
65. Where the identity of the person named in any warrant is
unknown or it is difficult to ascertain who is the person named
therein, the executing officer shall seek assistance from the
Virtual Complainant and/or the Complainant in the matter.
66. The Second Division Officer in charge of Police Stations and
Process Offices, where there are warrants which have not been
executed due to either the death of or failure to locate the person
named therein, shall return the warrants to the Court and
Process Branch for filing after the periods mentioned hereunder
from the date of issue have elapsed:
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 31
Criminal Prosecution and Process S.O. No. 10
Proviso
Return of
Warrants



(1) In the case where the person cannot be located:
(a) First Instance Warrant—
Arrestable Offences—10 years
Non-Arrestable Offences—5 years
(b) Time Allowed Commitment
Warrants—3 years
(c) Affiliation Warrant—7 years
(d) Maintenance Warrant—7 years
(e) When returning any of the above-mentioned
warrants to the Court of issue, the Second
Division Officer shall submit through the
Officer in charge of the Division/Branch—
(i) the warrant together with the
history sheet;
(ii) written explanation indicating file
reason(s) for non-execution.
(2) In the case of death of the person named in a
warrant:
The Second Division Officer shall submit to the
Court of issue through the Officer in charge of the
Division/Branch:
(a) the warrant together with the History
Sheet;
(b) the Death Certificate supported by all
affidavit, authenticating the identity of the
deceased;
(c) a “covering” report.
(3) Notwithstanding the above, warrants issued for the
arrest of persons in “capital” offences shall not be
returned to the Court of issue for non-execution,
except where the person named therein has died.
67. The Second Division Officer in charge of Stations and
Process Offices may transfer a warrant from one Station to
another, if the person named in the warrant is either:
(a) detained at another Police Station; or
(b) residing in another Station District.
32 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 10 Criminal Prosecution and Process
Transfer of
Warrants



68. Where it becomes necessary to transfer a warrant from one
station to another, the officer transferring the warrant shall
observe the following guidelines:
(1) The warrant shall not be sent by mail.
(2) The History Sheet must be attached to the warrant.
(3) In the case of a Time Allowed Commitment Warrant:
(a) it must be accompanied by the original
and duplicate of the form as shown at
“Appendix L”;
(b) the Second Division Officer of the
“receiving” Station shall acknowledge
receipt of the warrant:
(i) by signing the original of the form in
the column provided;
(ii) by returning the said original form
to the station from which it came;
(c) the Second Division Officer in charge of the
“sending” station, on the return of the
original of the form mentioned at paragraph
(3)(b)(ii) above, shall attach same to the
corresponding triplicate in the Time
Allowed Commitment Register;
(d) where a Time Allowed Commitment
Warrant is taken with a prisoner to a
Magistrate’s Court or State Prison, the
Police Officer conveying the warrant and
prisoner shall obtain a signature from
the person receiving the warrant on the
original of the form as shown at “Appendix
L” and it shall be dealt with in the same
manner as mentioned at paragraphs
(3)(b)(ii) and (3)(c) above.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 33
Criminal Prosecution and Process S.O. No. 10
Guidelines to
transferring
of warrants



69. (1) Where a warrant is discovered missing, the Police
Officer making the discovery, shall submit an immediate report to
the Officer in charge of the Division/Branch.
(2) The Officer in charge of the Division/Branch on receipt of
such report shall:
(a) institute an enquiry into the circumstances sur-
rounding the loss;
(b) if the warrant is not found, take such steps as are
necessary to have the particulars of the warrant
circulated within the Service and published in the
Departmental Orders;
(d) subsequent to circulation and publication, if the
warrant is still not found, arrangements must be
made for the re-issue of the warrant.
70. Where a warrant is issued, it shall be the responsibility of
the officer in charge of warrants in the District of the Court of
issue to:
(a) retrieve the warrant from the court;
(b) inform and hand over the warrant to the Data Entry
Clerk in his division.
71. The Data Entry Clerk to whom a warrant is handed shall—
(a) enter the information and contents of the warrant
into the Warrant File Data System;
(b) verify that the information is correctly entered in
the system.
34 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 10 Criminal Prosecution and Process
Loss of
Warrant
Inspection on
Warrant to be
entered on
Computer
Duties of
Data Entry
Clerk



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 35
Criminal Prosecution and Process S.O. No. 10
PART  IV
Movement of Detained Persons
72. “Detained Persons” refer to persons who are kept at
an institution provided by the State for the committal
and/or safe custody of that person pending trial.
73. The movement of detained persons is undertaken by
private security. Police Officers are required to provide
escort personnel.
74. Police Officers detailed to perform duties as escort
personnel shall—
(a) adhere to the provisions of Regulations
113–118 of the Police Service Regulations,
Chap. 15:01;
(b) when armed, avoid as far as possible the
actual handling of prisoners;
(c) thoroughly inspect and search all prisoners,
prisoner’s transport and escort vehicles before
and at the end of each journey;
(d) test all equipment prior to each journey and
make an entry indicating that the test had
been done.
75. Female prisoners shall be transported in separate
vehicles from male prisoners.
76. Juveniles shall be transported in separate vehicles
from other prisoners.
77. It shall be the duty of the Second Division Police
Officer in charge of the escort to obtain an official listing
from the Prison Authorities containing the names of all
the prisoners leaving the prison on the transport system.
Interpretation
Movement of
Detained
Persons
Duties of
Escort
Personnel
Transport of
Female
Prisoners
Transport of
Juveniles
Duties of
Second
Division
Police Officer
in Charge of
escort



36 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 10 Criminal Prosecution and Process
78. Divisional Commanders and the officer in charge of
Court and Process Branch for their respective area of
responsibility shall—
(a) ensure a general remand warrant register is
opened and maintained at every place where
detained persons are kept before being
conveyed to an institution of confinement; 
(b) open and maintain a remand warrant register
for each approved detention centre;
(c) ensure tha the registers referred to at (a) and
(b) above are prepared as set out in Appendix
“A”;
(d) ensure that a receipt book is supplied to the
Second Division Officer in charge of the escort
personnel.
79. The Second Division Officer in charge of the escort
personnel shall—
(a) obtain a receipt for the return of a detained
person; and
(b) obtain a signature in the remand warrant
register from the person at the Detention
Institution who received the detainee(s).
80. The First Division Officer in charge of the district in
which a court is situated shall—
(a) visit and inspect the cells where detained
persons are held daily;
(b) inspect and initial the remand warrant register
and receipts books daily;
(c) report immediately to the Divisional
Commander or Officer in charge of Court and
Process Branch the escape or attempted escape
of a detainee;
Responsibility
of Divisional
Commanders
and the
Officer in
charge of
Court and
Process
Branch 
Duty of the
Second
Division
Officer
First Division
Officer in
charge of
Court District



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 37
Criminal Prosecution and Process S.O. No. 10
81. Senior Second Division Officers in charge of stations
and places where detained persons are kept shall—
(a) visit and inspect the cells daily;
(b) cause an entry to be made in the station diary.
82. It shall be the duty of Police Officers to prevent
detained persons from escaping legal custody.
83. The following procedures shall be adopted when a
detained person escapes or has escaped from custody:
(a) The police officer or in the case where more
than one officer is present, the senior officer
shall immediately inform the First Division
Officer in charge.
(b) Ensure that police officers are detailed to
recapture the escapee.
(c) Submit a report on the facts surrounding the
escapee within twenty-four (24) hours to the
First Division Officer in charge of the area
where the prisoner has escaped.
84. The First Division Officer in charge of the area
where the prisoner has escaped, on receipt of the
information shall—
(a) inform the Divisional Commander;
(b) secure the name and photograph of the
escaped prisoner (if available);
(c) liaise with the Fingerprint Bureau to obtain a
trace of the escapee and all other relevant
information with respect to the escapee; and
(d) ensure that an All Points Bulletin (APB) is
transmitted to all police officers and station
districts.
Second
Division
Officer in
charge of
stations
Duty of Police
Officers to pre-
vent detained
persons from
escaping
custody
Duty Re:
escape
prisoners
Duty of First
Division
Officer Re:
escape
prisoners



38 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 10 Criminal Prosecution and Process
85. The Head of Division/Divisional Commander on
receipt of a report of the escapee of a detained person
shall—
(a) submit a full report to the Commissioner of
Police within forty-eight (48) hours of the
escape;
(b) the report shall include:
(i) the detailed circumstances surround-
ing the escape including any injury
suffered by any police officer or any
other person during the escape;
(ii) the action taken to recapture the
prisoner or prisoners;
(iii) copies of medical certificates (if
necessary; and
(iv) the disciplinary action taken or any
other action deemed necessary.
Duty of the
Head of
Division/
Divisional
Commander



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 39
Criminal Prosecution and Process S.O. No. 10




40 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 10 Criminal Prosecution and Process




TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 41
Criminal Prosecution and Process S.O. No. 10




42 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 10 Criminal Prosecution and Process




TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 43
Criminal Prosecution and Process S.O. No. 10




44 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 10 Criminal Prosecution and Process




TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 45
Criminal Prosecution and Process S.O. No. 10




46 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 10 Criminal Prosecution and Process




TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 47
Criminal Prosecution and Process S.O. No. 10




48 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 10 Criminal Prosecution and Process




TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 49
Criminal Prosecution and Process S.O. No. 10




50 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 10 Criminal Prosecution and Process




TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 51
Criminal Prosecution and Process S.O. No. 10
