TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
STANDING  ORDERS  19
POLICE BAND



Police Band
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
SECTION
1. Command of the Police Band
2. Entry into the Police Band
3. Band Apprentice
4. Bandsmen
5. Responsibility of the Director of the Police Band 
6. Public/Private Entertainment
7. Police Band to play with Permission
8. Procedure for Permission to Play at Public/Private Entertainment
9. Adverse effects of playing with Private Orchestra
10. Care and Safety of Instruments
11. Daily Care and Maintenance of Instruments
12. Monthly Care and Maintenance of Instruments
13. Removal of Instruments and Accessories
14. Submission of Inspection Reports
15. Duty of the Instrument Repairman
16. Keeping of Register
17. Damage to Instrument
18. Duty of the Director in Case of Damage to Instrument
19. Loan of Instrument
20. Marking of Instruments
2 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 19 Police Band



1. The Police Band shall be under the command of an officer
known as the Director of the Police Band and hereinafter referred
to as the “Director”.
2. Entry into the Police Band shall be either as—
(a) Band Apprentices; or
(b) Bandsmen.
3. A Band Apprentice is a person appointed as a trainee into
the Police Band in accordance with Regulation 6 of the Police
Service Regulations, Chap. 15:01.
4. Police Bandsmen may be appointed in two ways, either—
(a) Persons who have successfully completed a period of
Band Apprenticeship; or
(b) Direct recruitment of persons over the age of
eighteen (18) years as Bandsmen.
5. The Director of the Police Band is responsible for the
following:
(a) to open and keep a Register of all instruments issued
to the Band as set out in Appendices “A” and “B” of
this Order;
(b) to ensure that every Bandsman is issued with an
instrument;
(c) to ensure that quarterly inspections of all instru-
ments and accessories belonging to the Band are
carried out by the Deputy or Assistant Director of
the Band. An entry to this effect shall be made in
Appendix “A”;
(d) to take a bi-annual inventory in March and October
of each year of all instruments, accessories, public
address systems and other equipment. A report on
the inventory shall be submitted to the
Commissioner of Police through the Assistant
Commissioner “Training”;
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 3
Police Band S.O. No. 19
Command of
the Police
Band
Entry into
the Police
Band
Band
Apprentice
Bandsmen
Responsi-
bility of the
Director of
the Police
Band



(e) to depute an officer not below the rank of Bands-    man
II to be responsible for the repairs to instruments here-
inafter referred to as “Instrument Repairman”;
(f) preparation of a roster for the Band’s engagement
bi-annually for the information of the Commissioner
of Police;
(g) the administration, practice and performance of the
Police Steelband;
(h) to ensure that there is a training programme
approved by the Commissioner for Band Apprentices
in accordance with Regulation 6(3) of the Police
Service Regulations, Chap. 15:01;
(i) to ensure that the Band Apprentices attend the
training programmes referred to at paragraph 5 (h)
of this Order.
6. No member of the Police Band shall play at any public or
private entertainment except with the permission of the
Commissioner of Police.
7. The Police Band or part of the Band may, with the
permission of the Commissioner, play at entertainments approved
by him. Fees shall be charged for playing at such entertainments
at such rates as may be approved by the Commissioner. Such fees
shall be paid in advance and shall be divided amongst the Band in
such proportion as the Commissioner may direct.
8. (1) A member of the Police Band desirous of obtaining
permission to play at any public/private entertainment, shall
apply in writing to the Director, setting out the name of the
orchestra with which he/she desires to play and the period of time,
whether it is for a specified period or continuously.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Director, on receipt of an
application as at paragraph 8(1) of this Order, to forward such
application with his recommendations to the Commissioner of
Police.
4 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 19 Police Band
Public/
Private
Entertain-
ment
Police Band
to play with
permission
Procedure for
Permission
to Play at
Public/
Private
Entertain-
ment



9. It shall be the duty of the Director of the Police Band to
inform the Commissioner of Police, in writing, where the playing
with a private orchestra adversely affects the official duties of a
Bandsman, who has been granted permission as at paragraph 6 of
this Order.
10. It shall be the duty of a Bandsman issued with an
instrument to ensure its safe keeping, efficient functioning, care
and general maintenance.
11. It shall be the duty of a Bandsman to ensure that after
every practice session or performance, the instrument issued to
him/her or placed in his charge, is cared for and maintained in the
following manner:
(a) Silver Plated Instruments (the Brass Section)
(i) Empty out the Water.
(ii) Dry thoroughly.
(iii) Exercise extreme caution to ensure that
the instrument is not denied.
(b) Reed Section
(i) Remove mouthpiece and wipe dry the
interior of instrument.
(ii) Do not use metal object for cleaning.
(c) Wooden Instruments
(i) Wipe clean.
(d) Electrical, Instrumental, and Public Address
Systems
(i) Keep clean from dust and/or dirt.
(ii) Protect from rain, when on open-air
engagements.
(iii) Do not drag, drop or bounce when
transporting.
(iv) Place instrument in its case after cleaning.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 5
Police Band S.O. No. 19
Adverse
effects of
playing with
Private
Orchestra
Care and
Safety of
Instruments
Daily Care
and
Maintenance
of
Instruments



12. It shall be the duty of a Bandsman to ensure that at least
once every month, the instrument issued to him or placed in his
charge, is cared for and maintained in the following manner:
(a) Silver Plated Instruments (the Brass Section)
(i) Flush with warm and soapy water and
rinse thoroughly with plain water.
(ii) Oil and grease valves, slides and springs.
(iii) Do not use force when cleaning valves,
slides and springs.
(b) Reed Section
(i) Oil lightly, screws and springs.
(ii) Grease all joints lightly.
(iii) Pass a slightly oiled cloth through the bone
of the instruments.
13. Instruments, accessories, public address systems, other
equipment and musical documents shall not be removed from the
Police Band Room except in the course of duty.
14. (1) It shall be the duty of the officer detailed to carry out
inspection of instruments to submit a written report to the
Director within forty-eight (48) hours after the completion
of such inspection.
(2) In the event of damages/loss of instruments, the
Director shall submit a written report immediately to the Deputy
Commissioner of Police.
15. It shall be the duty of the Instrument Repairman to comply
with the following instructions:
(a) if the repair to the instrument is minor, he shall give
directions to the respective Bandsman on repairing
the instrument;
(b) carry out repairs on major damages to the instru-
ment, include the cost or estimate cost of repairs in
his report to the Director within forty-eight hours of
the receipt of the instrument for repairs;
6 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 19 Police Band
Monthly
Care and
Maintenance
of
Instruments
Removal of
Instruments
and
Accessories
Submission
of Inspections
Reports
Duty of the
Instrument
Repairman



(c) examine each instrument in the Police Band at least
once per month and correct any defects found. An
entry shall be made in the Register of instruments
indicating the general condition of the instrument
and type of repairs carried out, if any.
16. (1) A Register for the recording of instruments received for
repairs, shall be kept as set out in Appendix “C” of this Order.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Bandsman in charge of
repairs and maintenance, to record the particulars of an instru-
ment received for repairs in the “Repairs to Band’s Instruments
Register”.
17. Should an instrument of the Band be damaged while in the
possession, care or charge of any Bandsman, he shall comply with
the following instructions:
(a) Submit a written report to the Director of the Police
Band within twenty-four (24) hours of the incident
indicating the circumstances under which the
instrument was damaged.
(b) Report to the Instrument Repairman within twenty-
four (24) hours of the damage to have the instrument
repaired.
(c) Make any minor repairs that are necessary under
the direction of the Instrument Repairman.
18. It shall be the duty of the Director of the Police Band to
comply with the following instructions:
(a) cause enquiries to be made into the damage of any
instrument;
(b) obtain an estimated cost of repairs or replacement;
(c) cause a comprehensive report to be submitted
for the information of the Deputy Commissioner
“Administration and Finance”.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 7
Police Band S.O. No. 19
Keeping of
Register
Damage to
Instrument
Duty of the
Director in
Case of
Damage to
Instrument



19. Members of the Police Band are strictly forbidden from
lending any instrument/accessory/equipment or any part thereof
belonging to the Band.
20. It shall be the duty of the Director to ensure that every
instrument/accessory/equipment issued to the Police Band carry
an identification number for example, TTPS: 1, 2, 3 or 4. This
number shall be recorded in a column in the Instrument Issued
Register.
8 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 19 Police Band
Loan of
Instrument
Marking of
Instruments



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 9
Police Band S.O. No. 19




10 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 19 Police Band
