 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TRIN IDAD AND TOB AGO P OLICE SE RVICE 
 
S TAND IN G ORD ERS 16  
 
P OCKE T DIARY 



2 TR IN ID AD AND TOB AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
S .O. No.    16  Pocket Diary 
 
 
Poc ket Diary 
 
 
ARR AN GE ME N T OF SE CT ION S 
 
SE CTION 
 
1. Interpretation 
2. Iss ue of Pocket Diary 
3. Certificate of Iss ue–Pock et Diary 
4. Pocket Diary Register 
5. Poss ess ion of Pocket Diary 
6. Pu rpose of the Pocket Diary 
7. Kee ping of Pocket Diary 
8. Insp ect ion an d Initialling 
9. Production of Diaries in Cour t Orderly Room an d Cour t  
10.  Loss of Pocket Diaries 
11.  Destr uction of Pocket Diaries 



3 TR IN ID AD AND TOB AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
Pocket Diary S .O. No.   16  
 
Pocket Diary 
Register  
Possession of 
pocket diary  
Certificate of 
Issue –Pocket 
Diary  
Interpretation   
Issue of Pocket 
Diary  
 
1. In this Standing Orders:   
“Pocket Diary ” refers to  an official  diary  approved  by the  
Commiss ioner of Police and iss ued to all police officers. 
“Register” refers to a written or electronic record of events, 
transactions and information.  
 
 
2. (1)  Pocket diaries  shall  be issued by the Police Quartermaster Stores         
to Divisions /Bra nches/Sect ion s/Sta t ion s/ Units .                                          
 
(2) Every police officer shall be issued with a pocket diary.  
 
(3) It shall be the responsibility of the Officer- in -Charge of a 
Division/ Branch / Section / St ation/ Unit to ensure that all police o fficers 
under his command are issued with a pocket diary. 
 
(4) Pocket diaries    issued   to   police   officers   sh all   be 
recorded in a Pock et Diary Register k ept at Divisions/Bra nches/ 
Section s/Sta t ion s/Units . 
 
(5) Pocket diaries iss ued to police officers must bear the sta mp 
of the Commiss ioner of Police or Head of Division /Bra nch/ Section/ 
Unit on the front in side cover and numbered consecutively. 
 
3. It  shall  be  the  duty of the  police  officer  iss uing a  pocket     
diary to a f f i x t h e  certificate as set out in Appendix I immediately                  
below   the   sta mp.    
 
4. (1)  It shall be the resp onsibility of the Officer -in -Cha rge of a  
Division /Bra nch /Sect ion /Sta t ion/ Unit to  keep a register  of  all                 
Pocket Diaries received and iss ued by him. 
 
(2) The Pocket Diary Register shall indicate the number , ra n k 
and na me of the officer to whom the diary is iss ued. The signatu res 
of the iss uing and receiving officers must app ear in the colum ns 
provided for tha t purpose. 
 
(3) The Second Division Officer -in -Cha rge of a Sta tion 
/Section/ Unit, when requesting  pocket   dia ries   from   t he   Officer -in 
-Cha rge   of   a Division /Bra nch/ Section/ Unit, shall submit a retur n 
showing the date an d to whom diaries were previously issued. 
 
5. Police officer s shall have their officially iss ued pocket diaries in            
their possession  whilst on duty .        
 
 



4 TR IN ID AD AND TOB AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
S .O. No.    16  Pocket Diary 
 
 
 
Pu rpose of 
the pocket 
diary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Keeping of 
Pocket Diary 
6. The pocket  diary  is  the  police  officer ’s  best  safegua rd 
against allegation(s) of dishonesty and acting in  bad  faith  when 
performing his duties. Therefore the officer shall— 
 
(a) record  therein  all  activities  connected  with  the 
performa nce of his duties; 
 
(b) record  details  of  all  reports   made   to  him including 
the na me(s) and add ress (es) of person (s), observations, 
details of any investigations made and sta tements 
(where necess ary); 
 
(c) record  descriptions  of  wan ted ,   kidn apped   a nd 
miss ing persons, stolen an d lost  property, lighting- up  
hou rs   a nd   a ny   ot her   ma t ter   which   it   is necess ary 
to record. 
 
 
7. (1) It shall be the duty of every police officer to keep and 
maint ain his official pocket diary in accordance with the following 
instr uct ion s: 
 
(a) the front  end with the pocket  shall  be used as a diary; 
and the back  end  shall  be used for noting descriptions, 
lighting-up hours and references, for example cautions 
under the Judges Rules; 
 
(b) ever y page shall  be nu mbered consecutively in ink and the 
Certificate at Appendix II affixed to the inside  back  cover ; 
 
 
(c) each day, a line in red ink shall  be ruled beneat h the 
last  ent ry of the previous day and the next line headed 
with the da y an d date; 
 
(d) all ent ries must be carefully an d accura tely made in 
chronological order at the time of, or  a s  soon  as 
practicable after the occur rence to which they refer ; 
 
(e) the time of each ent ry shall be noted in the  ma r gin in  
the same line where the entry starts; 
 
(f) all errors are to be crossed out with a single line and initialled; 



5 TR IN ID AD AND TOB AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
Pocket Diary S .O. No.   16  
 
 
(g) sta tements are to be recorded in the actu al words of 
the sp eaker who shall be invited to read over and sign; this 
shall include suspects ; 
 
(h) per son s ma k in g reports should be required to sign 
the pocket diary entries after they have bee n read over 
to them ; 
 
(i) ent ries shall  be ma de directly in the pocket diary. 
 
(2) Police officers shall not do any of the following in their 
pocket diary: 
 
(a) ma k e erasures;  
 
(b) t ear out or glue together an y pages; 
 
(c) over writ e; 
 
(d) write between lines ( interlineation ); 
 
(e) leave an y line sp aces or blank sp aces— 
(i) where blank sp aces or lines have bee n left 
out , it must be scored  off by  means  of a 
wavy line; 
(ii) where pages are unintentionally left out , a 
diagonal line shall be drawn i n  r e d  i n k  
across the blank pages from top to bottom and 
t h e  w o r d s  “  O M I T T E D  I N  E R R O R ”  
w r i t t e n  i n  r e d  a l o n g  t h a t  l i n e .   
8. (1)  Pocket  diaries  shall  be  produced  for  insp ect ion   an d/   Insp ection 
or initialling on the following occasions: 
 
(a) to t he Second Divi sion Officer -in -Cha rge 
Sta t ion /Bra nch/ Section/ Unit ever y da y; 
 
(b) when retur ning to a Sta tion off duty or from leave; 
 
(c) when lea vin g a Sta t ion off duty or on leave (except in 
cases of emergency); 
 
(d) when visited on duty by a senior officer ; 
 
(e) to the prosecutor with conduct of the matter when attending 
court orderly room , court and disciplinary tribunal; 
 
(f) on any other occasion at the request of a senior 
officer . 
and 
initiallin g 



6 TR IN ID AD AND TOB AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
S .O. No.    16  Pocket Diary 
 
 
On all the occasions referred to above, the officer  to whom the 
pocket diary is produced  shall, subject to subsection (4 ) examine 
and  initial  the entries  and record therein any observation s tha t ma y 
be necess ary. In the case of production on retur n off duty or leave, the 
sent ry in the Reception Area shall  examine and initial the  relevant  
entry  of  the reporting officer.  
 
(2) It shall be the duty of senior officers to whom pocket diaries are 
presented for insp ection, to insp ect the ent ries therein and initial such 
diaries. The senior officer shall do so by affixing his signatu re beneat h 
the last ent ry at  the  front  an d  back  of  the  p ocket  d iaries  and  
make ent ries t h e r ein if the circumsta nces warran t it .  
 
 
(3) Whenever  su ch  a n   inspect ion  is   car ried   ou t ,   a 
corresp onding ent ry shall be ma de: 
(a) in th e case of corpora ls —in the sta t ion diary 
an d sergean ts 
(b) in  t he case of Insp ect or s —in t he r e l e v an t 
or First Division Officer s  Insp ector s’ or First 
Divi sion Officers’ 
Insp ect ion Book 
 
 
(4) A Second Division Officer shall not produce his pocket diary for inspection 
to an officer of the same rank or junior in rank except in court matters to the 
prosecutor. Inspecting and initialing officers shall not sign in the column 
reserved for the time. 
 
Production of 
Diaries in 
Cour t  
Orderly 
Room, 
Cour t  a n d  
T r i b u n a l 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9. (1) Police officers at tending Cour t Orderly Room, Cour t and 
Disciplinary Tribunals shall  ta k e with them their pocket diaries 
t h a t  c o n t a i n  entries relating to the sp ecific cases in which they 
have to testify . 
 
(2) Pocket diaries shall be regarded as exhibits and be available 
for reference or production to the Cour t. They are to be kept un til 
the expira tion of such ca ses.  
(i ) Where a police officer is about to retire, resign , is  
suspended or for any other  reason is discharged from the 
Service , the S econd Division Office r – in - Charge of 
Station/ Branch/ Section / Unit where he last served shall 
collect from him all pocket diaries .  
(ii ) In the case of a suspended police officer the pocket 
diary shall be handed over in accordance with Standing 
Order 48 . 
 



7 TR IN ID AD AND TOB AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
Pocket Diary S .O. No.   16  
 
Preservation  of 
Pocket Diary  
Loss of Pocket 
Diaries  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10. (1) It shall be the duty of all police officer s t o secure their 
pocket diaries against loss by keeping them in a safe place under 
their control . 
 
(2) A police officer shall immediately report the loss of his pocket 
diary as soon as such loss is discovered, to any Station/ Section / Unit 
givi ng details of the circumsta nces sur rounding the loss . 
 
(3) The senior officer at the Station/Section/Unit shall on receiving the 
report, record it in the Station Diary and immediately submit a report 
to the Officer – in -Charge of the Division/Branch/Section/Unit.  
 
(4) The Officer – in -Charge of the Division/Branch/Station/Section /Unit 
where the report is received shall within 48 hours forward a copy of the 
report to: 
i.  the Deputy Commissioner of Police with responsibility for 
Administration; 
ii. the Disciplinary Officer for investigation; and 
iii. The Officer – in -Charge of the Division/Branch/Station/Section 
/Unit where the police officer concerned is attached. 
 
(5) If the loss did not occur in the district where the police officer 
concerned is attached, in addition to the step taken at (10) (2) above, he 
shall submit a written report to the Officer- in- Charge of the Division 
/Branch/Section /Unit where he is attached, within forty-eight (48) 
hours.  
 
 
11.   (1) All completed pocket diaries and those referred to in subsection 
9 (2) (i) shall be digitized by the department responsible for Information and 
Communication Technology and retained indefinitely.  
 
(2) The actual pocket d iaries shall be retained indefinitely in 
accordance with Section 42 of the Freedom of Information Act at a location 
designated by the Commissioner of Police. 



8 TR IN ID AD AND TOB AGO P OLIC E S ERVICE 
S .O. No.    16  Pocket Diary 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX I 
 
 
CERTIFICATE OF ISSUE – POCKET DIARY 
 
 
I No……………….Rank……………….Name……………….. hereby 
certifying having issued this Pocket Diary to 
No…………….Rank……………..Name……………………………… on 
Date…………..Place………………. 
 
 
 
APPENDIX II 
 
OFFICER’S CERTIFICATE 
 
I hereby certify having checked the pages of this diary and found them to be correctly numbered 
consecutively from 1 to ….. or I hereby certify having numbered the pages of this diary consecutively 
from 1 to ….. 
 
Signature: 
 
Number/ Rank/ Name: 