YN
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO POLICE SERVICE
STANDING ORDERS 17
STATION DIARY
~
.


--- page break ---

168
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO POLICE SERVICE
S.O. No. 17 ___ Station Diary oe ~
Station Diary
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
SECTION
1. Station Diary
~
2. Issue of
3. Putting into Use
4. Keeping of Station Diary
5. Use of Station Dairy Columns
6. Entries to be Made in the Station Diary
7. Standard Entries
8. Handover
9. Guidelines to the preparation of the Handover
10. Number of Diaries to be issued
11. Production In Court
12. Extracts
13. Destruction
—


--- page break ---

169
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO POLICE SERVICE
Station Diary S.O. No. 17

L “Station Diary” refers to an Official register wherein entries station Diary
relating to reports, occurrences, observations at Stations and the
movements of persons, arms and ammunition and other articles
are chronologically recorded.

a 2. Station Diaries shall be issued by the Police Stores to Issue of
Branches/Sections/Stations.

3. When a new Station Diary is to be put into use, it shall be the Putting into
responsibility of the Second Division Officer-in-charge of a Police on
Station/Branch/Section/Unit to ensure that—

(a) On the outer side of the front cover of the Station
Diary, the words “Date Commenced” with the date
on which the Station Diary was put into use as well
as “Date Completed” are written. The words “Date
Due For Destruction” will also be written thereon.
The serial number of the register is also to be
written on the cover of the said register, after the
register has been recorded in the “Completed Books”
register.

(b) Each page of the Station Diary is numbered
consecutively; and

(c) Asigned certificate is entered on the last page of the
Station Diary showing that each page is correctly
numbered consecutively. This certificate must be
signed by a senior Second Division Officer other

than the one who numbered the pages.

4. It shall be the duty of a Police Officer when engaging the use Keeping of
of a Station Diary to comply with the instructions following: Seaton Diary

(a) Make the entry in blue or black ink in a neat, clean
and legible manner.

(b) Entries in which firearms and ammunition are

Ne mentioned, only the description of the firearms is to
be recorded in red ink.

(c) Number the first entry after midnight from “one”

and continue consecutively and chronologically.
PS.0.—22


--- page break ---

170

TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO POLICE SERVICE

—______S:.0.No.17_ Station Diary ak
(d) Where the last entry at the end of any day is on the

last line of the page, write the new date in red on the

first line at the top of the next page. Where the last

entry prior to the day change ends within a portion

of a page, draw a straight horizontal line in red ink -

immediately after the last entry and another line ~

parallel also in red ink on the line following, write

the full date in red ink within those lines.

(e) Make an entry directly in the Station Diary, at the
time of receiving a report, giving details available at
the time.

(f) Whenever an entry is incorrect, do not tamper with
it. Make another entry, which will indicate that the
particular entry is cancelled, and the new entry to
show the correct version or make an entry adding
the particulars which were left out in the incorrect
entry or deleting the particulars which are incorrect.

(g) Whenever an entry relates to a matter of particular
importance and it is of the view of the police officer
making the entry that it should be drawn to the
attention of supervisory staff, draw a perpendicular
line in red ink on the left side against the entry in

; the column “Nature of Record”.

(h) Any reference made to a Constable, Corporal or
Sergeant in the Station Diary shall include his ~
number, rank and name.

(i) Write the names of all persons in block letters.

Care must be taken to ensure accuracy in spelling.
When there is doubt, persons should be requested to
spell their names.

@ No writing between lines. ~

(k) Do not leave blank spaces and/or lines in the
column “Nature of Record”. The unused portion of
any line shall be scored off by means of a wavy line.


--- page break ---

171
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO POLICE SERVICE
(l) Do not stick or glue pages together.

(m) Do not erase entries or parts of entries or use
liquid paper or any other substance to obliterate
entries.

~~
5. The Station Diary has five (5) columns, which shall be used Use of
as follows: Caen Diary

(a) In Column 1 headed “Entry No.”—Enter the
number of the entry in a consecutive manner.

(6) In Column 2 headed “Reference No. 2”—Enter the
monthly serial number of each report prefixed by
the abbreviation of the category of the report and
the reference and cross-reference numbers of other
entries.

(c) In Column 3 headed “Subject”—Enter the caption
and classification of the entry as made.

(d) In Column 4 headed “Hour’—Enter the actual time
the report was made.

(e) In Column 5 headed “Nature of Record”—Enter
the nature of the report and details of the
occurrences, observation or movements.

6. It shall be the duty of a Police Officer to enter the following Entries to be
Se in a Station Diary: Btesion Day

(a) Occurrences at a Police Station, Branch or Office.

(b) The name and address of the informant and
the time, date and place of the incident reported
including a brief detail of such incident.

(c) (i) The details of a report received by a telephone

a or by telecommunication system.

(ii) Where such reports are to be despatched to
another destination, a cross-reference of the
register in which the message was despatched
must be entered in the Station Diary.


--- page break ---

172
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO POLICE SERVICE
8.0. No. 17 Station Diary -
(d) The arrival and departure of any visitor, the civilian
or police, the purpose of the visit and action taken or
contemplated in connection with such visit.
(e) The whereabouts of personnel attached to a Police -
Station/Branch/Section/Office. ~
(f) The receiving and handing over of any item of
property and/or exhibits and/or any other thing from
one person and/or station to another.
(g) The detention of a person at a Police Station and the
reason for his detention; the physical condition of
the person so detained noting his condition when he
was brought in and also the items which he had on
his person. His departure is to be likewise noted,
giving similar details.
(h) Any pronounced change in the weather.
| (i) The disruption in water and electricity supply at
, Station also telephone service.
(@) Any other matter which may come to the attention
of the Sentry during the course of his duty.
(k) A red line is to be drawn along the entire length
of the left side of the entry, which needs to be
highlighted. _
Standard 7. It shall be the responsibility of the Second Division Officer-
Entries in-charge of the Charge Room to ensure that the instructions as
set out in the following manner are complied with:
(a) At 6.00 a.m. each day, the clock at the Police Station
shall be synchronised with the time on radio and an
entry made in the Station Diary to this effect. ~
(6) At 6.00 a.m. each day, the Police Station telephone
and wireless set shall be tested and an entry to the
effect made in the Station Diary.


--- page break ---

173
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO POLICE SERVICE
= Station Diary S.O. No. 17
(c) At 7.00 a.m. each day, an entry showing the brief
particulars of the weather shall be entered in the
Station Diary as follows:
(i) Visibility—Good, Bad or Otherwise;
(ii) Wind—Strong, Slight or Calm;
- (iii) Rain—Heavy or Slight.
(d) The Second Division Officer-in-charge of the
Station shall—

(i) Examine the entries in the Station Diary
at least once every day and will certify not
later than 8.00 a.m. by an entry in the
Station Diary as shown hereunder,
indicating that he has read all entries in
the books and registers of the Station. The
certificate shall also include a list of dis-
crepancies discovered and action taken by
him or instructions given to have them
corrected.

(ii) Enter in the Station Diary before
10.00 a.m. each day, a _ certificate
indicating that a check was made of all
firearms and ammunition issued to
Station. Such entry shall be made in red
ink.

(e) Where the Second Division Officer-in-charge is
unavoidably absent, the next senior Second
Division Officer or Constable will make the check
‘Se and sign the certificate. The Second Division
Officer-in-charge is, however, still responsible for
checking all entries made in his absence.
SPECIMEN OF SECOND DIVISION OFFICERS CERTIFICATE
“I hereby certify having examined all entries made in this
Diary for the past twenty-four (24) hours with the corresponding
ae entries made in other books and registers at Station, and I have
found them correct or found the following discrepancies and gave
certain instructions” (whichever is applicable).
Signature Rank


--- page break ---

174
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO POLICE SERVICE
S.O. No. 17 Station Diary —_ ~
() Before 10.00 a.m. each day the Second Division
Officer-in-charge of the Station shall check all arms
and ammunition issued to the Station/Section and
make an entry to that effect in red ink in the
Station Diary.

Handover 8. When the Second Division Officer-in-charge of the Charge
Room is relieved, an entry will be made in the Station Diary to
that effect and signed by both the relief and the relieving Second
Division Officer in the following form.

Guidelinesto 9. I handed over the duties of the Charge Room to

ecertne Mossi. TRAM ie, Nat | itiBENIE cece... with the

Handover keys and all Government Property on charge including the
itemised property in the property chest, if any, in any case of

firearms and ammunition indicate number, type and quantity,
Cash In Hand (Write the amount in words as well as figures). All
counterfoil receipt books checked and found correct, no receipt
pages found missing. In the case of prisoners in custody, state the
number, name and the offences for which they are charged,
animals impounded, recent reports of serious crimes and serious
road traffic accidents.
See Appendix “E” of Standing Orders for Specimen of the
Handover.

Number of 10. It shall be the responsibility of the Officer in charge ofa =

pa*'°’* Division or Branch to instruct how many Station Diaries may be
used at one Police Station or Branch at any one time having
regard to the nature and volume of work which passes through
the Charge Room.

Protuction in IL The Station Diary is a Departmental and privileged record;
neither it, nor any extract from it may be produced in Court, _
except by order of the Presiding Judge or Magistrate, or at the
direction of a First Division Officer. No unauthorised person will
have access to it, and no copy of any entry in it will be made except
on the instruction of such an Officer.


--- page break ---

oe 175
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO POLICE SERVICE
_— Station Diary S.O. No. 17
12. A Police Officer shall not make or have in his possession Extracts
an extract from a Station Diary without the permission of the
First Division Officer-in-charge of the Division/Branch where
such Diary is located.
e 13. A Station Diary shall not be destroyed before a period of Destruction
three (3) years after the date of the last entry or after the date of
the determination of court or disciplinary matters in which the
Station Diary is required, whichever is longer.
_—
es
