 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TRINIDAD AND TOB AGO POLICE SERVICE 
 
STANDING ORDERS 15 
 
FURNITURE AND STOR ES 



2 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO POLIC E SERVICE 
 
S .O. No.   15  Furniture and Stores 
 
 
Furniture and Store s 
 
 
ARR AN GEMENT OF SECT IONS 
 
SECTION 
 
 
1. Interpretation 
2. Inventory Registers  
3. Furniture  Inventory Registers  
4. Stores Inventory Registers  
5. Stores Inventory 
6. Resp onsibility of Officer-in-Cha rge 
7. Disp osal of Stores 
8. Disposal o f other un serviceabl e it ems  
9. Ha nding Over 



3 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO POLIC E SERVICE 
 
Furniture and Stores S .O. No.   15  
 
 
1. In this Standing Order: 
“Furniture ” refer s to moveable items used for general convenience 
such as desk s, tables, chair s, electronic equipment, etc., in a 
police building . 
“Inventory” refers to  a detailed list of furniture and equipment in 
each room of a police building that can be in a digital or hard 
copy format .  
“Police buildings” refers to any building, structure or part thereof  
assigned  to  the  Police  Service  by  the  Minister with responsibility for 
the Police Service, for  the purpose of accommodation or any other 
official use, as may be determined by the Commissioner of Police. 
“Stores” refers to items  such as cleaning equipment, tools, brooms, 
brushes and other supplies. All such items shall be drawn from the 
Police Quartermaster Stores. 
“Register” refers to a written or electronic record of events, transactions 
and information. 
 
 
2. Two (2) registers  shall be kept for inventory purposes. They 
are—  
(a) Furniture  Inventory Register ; 
 
(b) Stores Inventory Register . 
 
3. The Furniture  Inventory Register  shall cont ain a record of all 
furniture and equipment iss ued to police building s identifying the 
rooms and the specific furniture and eq uipment contained therein. 
 
4. The Stores Inventory Register shall contain a record of all tools, cleaning 
equipment, brooms and other supplies drawn from the Police 
Quartermaster Stores. It shall reflect items of stores issued and stock on 
hand. 
 
5. An Inventory shall be posted on a wall or par tition of each 
room in the police building  or kept in a digital format  after such 
items have bee n registered in the relevan t inventory register . 
  
6. It shall be the resp onsibility of the Second Division Officer - in -
Charge of the Station/ Branch/ Section/ Unit — 
 
(a) to ensure tha t a record of all furniture and stores are 
entered in the relevan t inventory register s on the day 
they are received; 
 
(b) to ensure tha t all furniture and stores are properly 
secured and sheltered from the elements; 
Interpretation 
Inventory  
Register  
Furniture  
Inventory  
Register  
Stores  
Inventory  
Register  
Stores  
Inventory  
Responsib ility  
Of Officer -in - 
Charge  



4 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO POLIC E SERVICE 
 
S .O. No.   15  Furniture and Stores 
 
 
 
(c) to ensure tha t furniture and stores when not in use, are 
kept at an app ointed place and not left in other par t s 
of the compound; 
 
(d) to accoun t for such furniture and stores un til they have 
bee n withdrawn or destroyed under proper aut hority; 
 
(e) to ensure that where a Branch/ Section/ Unit proposes to 
occupy part of a police building he along with the Second 
Division Officer –in – Charge of the Branch/ Section/ Unit 
shall verify the inventory of the proposed area. He shall 
immediately execute a handover in duplicate. They shall 
each retain a copy for transmission to the  Officer – in – 
Charge of their respective Division/ Branch/ Section/ Unit; 
 
(f) to report any loss , unauthorized  removals, dam ages 
or short ages to the Officer-in-Cha rge of the 
Division/Bra nch/ Section/ Unit  within 48 hours of 
discovery; 
 
(g) to ensure that when there are any  losses, deficiencies 
or unserviceable ar ticles to be written off, the aut hority 
for so doing shall  be quoted in the relevan t Inventory 
Register . 
(h) to ensure by way of written notice that it is prohibited to 
remove items from a room without his written permission.  
 
 
7. Ar ticles of st ores su ch as  brooms, br ushes, ga rden implements, 
dustbins, cleaning ma terials, torchlights, bat teries, etc., shall be 
written off on the aut hority of the Officer-in-Cha rge of the Division 
/Bra nch/ Section/ Unit . All other ar ticles shall only be written off as 
unserviceable in accordance with any law which provides for the 
procurement, retention and disposal of government property which may be 
in force from time to time. 
 
8.  The Officer-in-Cha rge of the Divi sion /Bra nch / Section / Unit 
shall dispose of all unserviceable items in accordance with any law 
which provides for the procurement, retention and disposal of government 
property which may be in force from time to time.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disposal of  
Stores 
Disposal of 
other 
unserviceable 
items  



5 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO POLIC E SERVICE 
 
Furniture and Stores S .O. No.   15  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9. (1) It shall be the resp onsibility of the Second Division Officer-
in-Cha rge of a Sta tion /Section/ Unit or an office to ha ndover all 
furniture, stores and other ar ticles for which he is responsible to 
his successor when the supervision of such Sta tion /Section /Office 
cha nges. The handover shall take place  within seven days by 
the officer assuming and demitting offi ce, but not more than 
fourteen  days of such occurrence.  
 
(2) A Certificate of Ha ndover in the man ner shown at 
App endix “A” of this Order shall be made and signed in the 
Inventory Register . A detailed list of excesses or deficiencies 
must be signed by both Second Division Officers and forwarded 
to the Officer -in-Charge with an explanation by the Second 
Division Officer handing over. In the event of any omission to 
report deficiencie s, the officer detecting such omission shall 
submit a report to the Disciplinary Officer for investigation. 
(3) Where a Second Division Officer-in-Cha rge is un able to be 
present at a handover on accoun t of illness or for any 
other reason, the Officer-in-Cha rge of the Division /Bra nch/ 
Section/ Unit shall appoint a First Division Officer to supervise 
the handover. The handover shall take place within seven 
days  of the appointment.   
 
 
 
Handing  
Over  



6 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO POLIC E SERVICE 
 
S .O. No.   15  Furniture and Stores 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
20 