TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
STANDING  ORDERS  18
WANTED PERSONS



Wanted Persons
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
SECTION
1. Wanted Person
2. Wanted Persons Notice Board 
3. Criminal Records Office Circulars
4. Categories of Wanted Persons 
5. Interpol  Section
6. Photographs and Descriptions
7. Forwarding of Descriptions
8. Request for Posting/Publication
9. Publication of Description
10. Supply of Description or Photographs
11. Circulation of Description or Photographs
12. Notice Board at Station
13. Arrest of a Wanted Person
14. Submission of Monthly Return of Wanted Persons
2 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 18 Wanted Persons



1. “Wanted person” refers to a person who cannot be located for
a crime allegedly committed by that person or a person who has
been charged and has escaped lawful custody for a crime
committed.
2. “Wanted Persons Notice Board” in a police building refers to
a Board on which the photograph, and description of a wanted
person and the crime allegedly committed are indicated for the
purposes of identification by Police Officers and the general public.
Notwithstanding the above, the photograph of a wanted person
must not be placed on a Notice Board unless there is in existence
a warrant for his arrest.
3. “Criminal Records Office Circulars” refer to a Circular
published by the Criminal Records Office.
4. Wanted Persons are divided into two (2) categories.
Local and International:
(a) “Local” refers to—
(i) a person who was in lawful custody and
has escaped;
(ii) a person for whom a warrant has
been issued and there is in existence a
photograph of him;
(iii) a person for whom a warrant has
been issued and there is no photograph
available;
(b) “International” refers to persons who are wanted by
the International Police Community and are
believed to be living in Trinidad and Tobago or who
are likely to visit the country.
5. The Interpol Section of the Police Service deals with inter-
nationally wanted persons. It is responsible for sending to
Interpol Headquarters, the photographs, descriptions and brief
facts of wanted persons who have fled from Trinidad and Tobago.
This Section is also responsible for receiving photographs and
descriptions of persons wanted by the International Police
Community who are believed to be either—
(a) living in Trinidad and Tobago; or
(b) visiting the country.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 3
Wanted Persons S.O. No. 18
Wanted
Person
Wanted
Persons
Notice Board
Criminal
Records
Office
Circulars
Categories of
Wanted
Persons
Interpol
Section



6. Whenever it is necessary to have the photograph and
description of a wanted person posted and/or published, it shall be
the duty of the Second Division Officer-in-charge of a
Station/Branch making such request, to supply the Officer in
charge, Divisional Criminal Investigations Department with the
following particulars:
(a) name and aliases of wanted person;
(b) address of wanted person;
(c) description of wanted person;
(d) peculiarities;
(e) places frequented;
(f) movements;
(g) names and addresses of relatives and associates;
(h) number, rank and names of Police Officers to whom
wanted persons are known;
(i) the crime for which the person is wanted; and
(j) particulars of the warrant, namely—
(i) warrant number;
(ii) date of issue; and
(iii) place where warrant is filed.
7. It shall be the duty of the Officer in charge of Divisional
Criminal Investigations Department to forward to the Assistant
Commissioner “Crime”, the particulars at paragraph 6 of this
Order at least twenty-four (24) hours after receipt of the
particulars from the Station.
8. It shall be the responsibility of the Officer in charge
Divisional Criminal Investigations Department to ensure that a
request for the posting and/or publication of the photograph of a
wanted person is not made unless a warrant for his arrest has
been obtained for the wanted person.
9. (1) It shall be the responsibility of the Assistant
Commissioner “Crime” if he thinks fit to post and/or publish
the photograph and description of a wanted person in the
newspapers.
Photographs
and
Descriptions
Forwarding
of
Descriptions
Request for
Posting/
Publication
Publication of
Description
4 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 18 Wanted Persons



(2) It shall be the responsibility of the Officer in charge of
the Criminal Investigations Department and Criminal Records
Office to publish the name, address and aliases of a wanted
person in the Criminal Records Office Circular.
10. It shall be the responsibility of the Officer in charge
Criminal Records Office to supply the Officer in charge of a
Division/Branch with the photograph and description of a wanted
person.
11. It shall be the responsibility of the Officer in charge of
a Division to ensure that the photograph and description
of a wanted person are circulated to Divisional Criminal
Investigations Department and Stations in the Division.
12. It shall be the responsibility of the Second Division Officer-
in-charge of a Divisional Criminal Investigations Department and
Station to ensure that—
(a) there is a “Wanted Persons Notice Board” at Station;
(b) the “Wanted Persons Notice Board” is placed in a
conspicuous position at Station;
(c) the photograph and description of a wanted person is
placed on the “Wanted Persons Notice Board” at
Station;
(d) the photograph, description and other particulars of
a wanted person published in the newspapers are cut
out and placed on the Notice Board whenever it has
not been circulated by the Criminal Investigations
Department and the Criminal Records Office.
13. (1) It shall be the duty of the Second Division Officer-in-
charge of a Station at which a warrant for the arrest of a wanted
person is lodged, to inform the Officer in charge of the Criminal
Investigations Department and Criminal Records Office through
the Officer in charge of the Division, of the arrest of the wanted
person.
Supply of
Description
or
Photographs
Circulation of
Description
or
Photographs
Notice Board
at Station
Arrest of a
Wanted
Person
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 5
Wanted Persons S.O. No. 18



(2) It shall be the responsibility of the Officer in charge of
the Criminal Investigations Department and Criminal Records
Office to inform the Officer in charge of a Divisional Criminal
Investigations Department of the arrest of a wanted person.
(3) It shall be the duty of the Officer in charge of a Divisional
Criminal Investigations Department to inform the Second
Division Officer-in-charge of a Station of the arrest of a wanted
person.
(4) Whenever a wanted person is arrested or dies, it shall be
the responsibility of the Second Division Officer-in-charge of a
Divisional Criminal Investigations Department and Station to
ensure the following:
(a) that the photograph and description of the wanted
person(s) are removed completely from the “Wanted
Persons Notice Board”; and
(b) if the photograph cannot be removed, then it shall be
blanked off accordingly.
14. It shall be the responsibility of the Officer in charge of the
Division to submit a monthly return, showing the persons wanted
by his Division to the Assistant Commissioner “Crime”. Such
return shall be submitted to the office of the Assistant
Commissioner “Crime” by the seventh (7th) day of each month. 
Submission
of Monthly
Return of
Wanted
Persons
6 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 18 Wanted Persons