TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
STANDING  ORDERS  21
CANINE BRANCH—K 9



Canine Branch—K 9
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
SECTION
1. Canine Branch
2. Dog Handler
3. Applications for transfer to Canine Branch
4. Training of Applicants
5. Acquisition of Dogs
6. Keeping of Registers
7. History Sheet/File
8. Training of Dogs
9. Enlistment into the Service
10. Care and Maintenance of Dogs
11. Kennelling
12. Kennel Management
13. Responsibility of the Second Division Officer-in-charge Canine Branch
14. Responsibility of the Officer in charge of the Charge-Room
15. Security of Dogs
16. Use of Police Dogs
17. Report of Injury
18. Stud Dogs or Brood Bitches
19. Disposal of Police Dogs
2 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 21 Canine Branch—K 9



1. The Police Canine Branch is a Specialist Unit within the
Service comprising of Police Officers and dogs. The Branch is used
as a support system to perform such duties as Patrols, Guard
Duty, Crowd Control, Drug Detection, Searches of Buildings,
Visits to scenes of crimes, Tracking re escaped prisoners or any
other duty as may be assigned by the Commissioner of Police from
time to time.
2. (1) A dog handler refers to a police officer who is attached to
the Canine Branch and trained in the technique of dog handling.
(2) Each police dog is assigned individually to a handler.
(3) A handler is responsible for the training, care,
maintenance and operational work of the said dog.
3. Police Officers with three (3) or more years service
may apply in writing through the Officer in Charge of a
Division/Branch for transfer to the Canine Branch.
4. Successful applicants will be required to undergo a Course
of Training to the satisfaction of the Officer in charge, Canine
Branch.
5. Dogs for the Police Canine Branch may be obtained from
three (3) sources:
(a) purchased by the State;
(b) bred for use at the kennels with the permission of the
Commissioner of Police;
(c) by gift with the permission of the Commissioner.
Dogs selected for training as police dogs are each given a
number and entered in a duplicate file. Simultaneously, a History
Sheet is opened in respect of the said dog.
6. Hereunder is a list of Registers which shall be kept at the
Canine Branch and contain the following information:
(a) Register of Dogs
The full description and photograph of the dog, age
when purchased, the price paid, the source from
which it was obtained and the eventual disposal
thereof.
Canine
Branch
Dog Handler
Applications
for transfer
to Canine
Branch
Training of
Applicants
Acquisition of
Dogs
Keeping of
Registers
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 3
Canine Branch—K 9 S.O. No. 21



(b) Training Register
The number, rank and name of the officer to whom
the dog is assigned, the name and number of the dog,
date of commencement of training, type of training
received, date of completion of training and the
results of the training.
(c) Feeding Book
In this Register, shall be recorded the amount of
items in cold storage and all other food supplies
received and issued on a daily basis for the dogs. At
the end of each month a recapitulation will be
entered showing the amount of cold storage and food
supplies received, issued, on hand during the said
month, any surplus or deficit and the amount carried
forward to the following month. At the end of each
month the Register will be checked and certified by a
Police Officer of or above the rank of Inspector,
designated by the Officers in charge, Canine Branch.
(d) Veterinary Surgeon’s Visit Book
The dates of visits, the name and signature of the
Government Veterinary Surgeon, the name and
number of the dog attended to, history of ailment and
medicines prescribed. Entries in this Register must
be made only by the Government Veterinary
Surgeon.
(e) Pharmacy Register
In this Register shall be recorded all medication
received and issued at the Canine Branch.
7. Simultaneously with the recording of the information in the
Register mentioned at paragraph 6 (a), a History Sheet/File as at
Appendix “A” will be opened in triplicate. The History Sheet/File
shall contain the information mentioned in the register referred to
and in addition, all periods of sickness and injury and the
treatment administered.
8. (1) Each dog has to undergo a period of not less than six (6)
months training.
4 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 21 Canine Branch—K 9
History
Sheet/File
Training of
Dogs



(2) On successful completion of training, the Officer in
charge, Canine Branch shall certify that the handlers and dogs
are suitably trained.
(3) Refresher training of dogs is desirable at least one day
per fortnight.
9. After a dog has been acquired by the Police Service, it is
given a name and on successful completion of training, it is given
a number. The details of the dog are then entered into the Dog
Register.
10. Dogs taken on the strength of the Service shall be cared
and maintained in the following manner:
(a) Grooming
(i) Grooming refers to the cleaning of the coat and
skin of the dog.
(ii) It must be done once per day except instructed
otherwise by a First Division Officer attached to
Canine Branch.
(iii) During grooming, regular inspection shall be
made for wounds, skin troubles or external
parasites on the animal.
(iv) Care must be taken that grooming is not
excessive.
(v) Bathing, provided the daily grooming is
properly carried out, should seldom be
necessary. Frequent bathing is likely to remove
the natural grease in the skin and coat to the
danger of the health and appearance of the dog.
Except otherwise directed by a First Division
Officer attached to Canine Branch, bathing a
dog shall not be more than once a  fortnight.
(b) Feeding
(i) Feeding of a dog must be done by 5.00 p.m.
daily. If other duties involving the dogs prevent
feeding at 5.00 p.m., they must be fed at the
earliest possible time after.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 5
Canine Branch—K 9 S.O. No. 21
Enlisting into
the Service
Care and
Maintenance
of Dogs



(ii) The feed should not be given immediately before
or after strenuous duties or exercises.
(iii) A Police dog should not normally be required for
any rigorous duties until three (3) hours has
elapsed after the animal had consumed its
meals. Working a dog shortly after it has eaten
can be considered a high mortality risk.
(iv) All food bowls must be removed from the
kennels fifteen (15) minutes after the dogs are
fed and all unconsumed feed disposed of
properly in order to prevent the harbouring of
rats. Only in the case of known shy feeders
should food be left in the kennels for not more
than an hour.
(v) All feeding utensils should be thoroughly
washed after use and properly stacked away by
6.00 p.m. daily.
(c) Sick Dogs
(i) In cases where a Police dog appears to be ill or
injured, the dog handler or any other handler
making the observation shall immediately
report their observations to the senior dog
handler who shall—
(1) examine the dog;
(2) administer a simple remedy if the
conditions so warrants;
(3) inform the Veterinary Surgeon if the
illness is of such a nature that it cannot
be treated by him;
(4) inform the Officer in charge, Canine
Branch of the action taken.
(ii) In the case where a Police dog is examined and
treated by the Veterinary Surgeon, the senior
Second Division Officer of the Branch present or
in the case of dog handlers at Out Stations, the
senior dog handler shall—
6 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 21 Canine Branch—K 9



(1) Submit a report to the Officer in
charge, Canine Branch stating the
nature of the complaint, advice given
and treatment prescribed by the
Veterinary Surgeon.
(2) Record in the Dog’s file the nature
of the complaint, the treatment
administered and advice given by the
Veterinary Surgeon.
11.Kennels may be of a permanent or temporary character but
in both cases must conform to basic standards. Those provided at
the Training Centres or Divisions where a number of dogs are
kept should preferably be of permanent structures.
All types of kennels should be—
(a) Free of stagnant water;
(b) Adequately ventilated;
(c) Of a size to permit the dog to stand or lie in comfort.
12. Management of the kennels must be done in the following
manner:
(a) The kennels and surroundings must always be kept
clean.
(b) The kennels must be scrubbed daily.
(c) All items of tools must always be washed after use
and put in their appropriate places.
13. The Second Division Officer-in-charge, Canine Branch shall
be responsible for the following:
(a) Detailing a Fatigue Programme between the hours of
7.00 a.m.—10.00 a.m. for specific duties at the
kennels.
(b) Inspecting the kennels and dogs by 10.00 a.m. daily
and shall make a certificate to this effect in the
Station Diary.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 7
Canine Branch—K 9 S.O. No. 21
Kennelling
Kennel
Management
Responsi-
bility of the
Second
Division
Officer-in-
charge
Canine
Branch



(c) Recording any or all observations made during such
inspection in the Station Diary.
14. (1) The Second Division Officer-in-charge of the Charge
Room shall be responsible for inspecting both the handler and dog
when parading them for duty.
(2) Specific observations must be made of the dog when
parading for or returning from duty.
(3) The Inspecting Officer shall make an entry to this
effect in the Station Diary.
15. The following security arrangements shall be observed by
all dog handlers while dogs are either in their kennels or away
from the Police Stations:
(a) Police dogs must be taken to and from their kennels
secured on leads.
(b) Police dogs either in their kennels or any other place
must be secured at all times.
(c) Kennel chains must be used to secure the kennels
while the dogs are housed therein.
(d) Police dogs taken out of their kennels for bowel
movements must be held on a long line or lead.
(e) Police dogs while tied to a leash or lead in a police
vehicle or any other place must be supervised at all
times.
16. (1) Applications/requests for the use of police dogs by
Officers in charge of Divisions/Branches shall be made directly to
the Officer in charge, Canine Branch.
(2) Such application/request should give information
about the type of duties the dogs are required to perform.
(3) Police dogs are trained in four (4) main categories—
8 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 21 Canine Branch—K 9
Responsi-
bility of the
Officer in
charge of the
Charge Room
Security of
Dogs
Use of Police
Dogs



(a) Basic
This dog can be used for searching buildings, open
and forested areas for evidence of crimes committed,
tracking suspected persons of crime and escaped
prisoners, crowd control and other security duties
such as patrol and guard duties at government
buildings.
(b) Multi-Handled
A multi-handled dog is one that is trained to perform
the same duties as the “Basic” dog except that it may
be handled by more than one handler.
(c) Explosive or Bomb Detection
An explosive or bomb detection dog is trained exclu-
sively for search and detection of bombs and other
explosive devices.
(d) Drug Detection
A drug detection dog is trained exclusively for search
and detection of drugs.
(4) When police dogs are used for crowd control, the
handlers and dogs should not mingle with the crowd but patrol
the area immediately in front of the crowd in order to make the
public aware of the presence of the dog. Undue aggressive attacks
on members of the public must be avoided.
(5) (a) Police dogs may be used for displays only with the
permission of the Commissioner of Police.
(b) Where permission has been granted for use of
police dogs at private functions or displays, the
promoters may be required to enter into a bond of
indemnity, indemnifying the Commissioner and
his subordinates from any action arising from any
injury sustained from the police dogs by any
person during such functions or displays.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 9
Canine Branch—K 9 S.O. No. 21



17. The following procedure shall be adopted when a police dog
accidentally bites or causes injury to a member of the public or
causes damage to property:
(a) In the case where a person has been bitten or
injured, the handler or any other police officer
present shall—
(i) ascertain the name and address of the
victim;
(ii) ensure that the victim is sent for medical
attention with dispatch;
(iii) inform the Second Division Officer-in-
charge of Canine Branch and submit a
report in writing.
(b) In the case where damage is done to property, the
handler or any other police officer present shall—
(i) ascertain the name and address of the
owner of the property;
(ii) estimate the extent of the damage;
(iii) inform the Second Division Officer-in-
charge of Canine Branch and submit a
report in writing.
(c) The Second Division Officer-in-charge of Canine
Branch on receipt of the information and/or the
report, as at paragraphs (a) and (b) above, shall
forward same with despatch to the Officer in charge,
Canine Branch.
18. (1) The Commissioner of Police may grant permission for
police dogs to be used for stud and breeding purposes.
(2) Any police bitch, which comes into season, must be
withdrawn from duty until the season has ended. An entry to this
effect shall be made in the Station Diary.
19. Where the government Veterinary Surgeon recommends
that a police dog be disposed of by public auction or euthanasia or
where it has died by natural causes or illness, the following  pro-
cedure shall be adopted:
Report of
Injury
Stud Dogs or
Brood
Bitches
Disposal of
Police Dogs
10 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 21 Canine Branch—K 9



(a) Public Auction
In the case of disposal by public auction—
(i) The Officer in charge, Canine Branch shall
submit in triplicate to the Commissioner of
Police his report and recommendations to
which is attached the Veterinary Surgeon’s
recommendations.
(ii) Subsequently the report will be submitted
with further recommendations to the
Permanent Secretary, Ministry of' National
Security/Accounting Officer for onward
transmission to the Auditor General copied
to the Comptroller of Accounts seeking
approval.
(iii) On receipt of the approval from the
Comptroller of Accounts, the dog will be
put up for sale by public auction and struck
off the strength of the Service.
(b) Death By Euthanasia
In the case of recommendation to cause death by
euthanasia of a Police dog—
(i) The Officer in charge of Canine Branch
shall proceed to euthanise the dog.
(ii) The Officer in charge, Canine Branch shall
immediately submit his report to the
Commissioner of Police to which will be
attached the Death Certificate of' the dog
which was euthanised and the government
Veterinary Surgeon’s report.
(iii) Subsequently, the report will be submitted
with further recommendations to the
Permanent Secretary, Ministry of National
Security/Accounting Officer, seeking
approval to have the dog removed from the
Register of Dogs.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 11
Canine Branch—K 9 S.O. No. 21



(iv) On receipt of' the approval from the
Ministry, the Commissioner of Police shall
instruct that the dog be struck off the
strength of' the Service and published in
the Departmental Orders.
(c) Death Due to Natural Causes or illness
In the case where a police dog died due to
natural causes or illness—
(i) The Officer in charge of Canine Branch
shall immediately submit a report to the
Commissioner of Police, to which will be
attached the Death Certificate of' the dog
and the government Veterinary Surgeon’s
report.
(ii) Subsequently, approval will be sought
from the Ministry of National
Security/Accounting Officer, to have the
dog removed from the Register of Dogs.
(iii) On receipt of' the approval from the
Ministry, the police will instruct that the
dog be struck off the strength of the Service
and published in the Departmental Orders.
12 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 21 Canine Branch—K 9



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 13
Canine Branch—K 9 S.O. No. 21




14 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 21 Canine Branch—K 9
