TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
STANDING  ORDERS  27
LOST AND STOLEN PROPERTY



Lost and Stolen Property
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
SECTION
1. Lost Property 
2. Stolen Property
3. Criminal Records Office Circular 
4. Lost and/or Stolen Property Register
5. Responsibility of Officer taking the Report
6. Transmission of Lost/Stolen Property
7. Responsibility of Officer-in-Charge of the Criminal Records Office
8. Recovery of Lost/Stolen Property 
9. Cancellation of Lost/Stolen Property
2 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 27 Lost and Stolen Property



Lost Property 
Stolen
Property
Criminal
Records
Office
Circular 
Lost and/or
Stolen
Property
Register
1. “Lost Property” refers to any article, animal or thing   reported
lost by any person to the police for investigation.
2. “Stolen Property” refers to any article, animal or thing
reported stolen by any person to the police for investigation.
3. “Criminal Records Office Circular” refers to a publication
made by the Criminal Records Office and circulated throughout
the Police Service in which the description, owner and value of
lost/stolen property are given and also the Station District from
which the articles were reported lost/stolen.
4. It shall be the responsibility of the Second Division Officer-in-
Charge of a Divisional Criminal Investigations Department or Station
to—
(a) ensure that a Lost and/or Stolen Property Register is kept
at his office or station. SeeAppendix “A” of this Order;
(b) ensure that the instructions following in connection with
the keeping of the said Register are complied with:
(i) in the column headed— enter the name of the
“Division” Division in which the
Police Station and/or
Divisional Criminal
Investigations
Department is located.
(ii) in the column headed— enter   the   name   of
“Station” the Station or Divi-
sional Criminal Inves-
tigations Department.
(iii) in the column headed— enter each article that
“Description of is reported lost and/or
Property” stolen giving the value
and stating whether
each article is identifi-
able or not. If the space
provided is insufficient,
attach a list of the lost
and/or stolen property
to the original and
duplicate forms.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 3
Lost and Stolen Property S.O. No. 27



(iv) in the column headed—enter the total value of
“Approximate total the article lost and/or
value ” stolen.
(v) in the column headed—enter the date on which
“Date Lost or Stolen” the article was lost
and/or stolen.
(vi) in the column headed— enter the location where
“Where Lost or Stolen” the article was lost
and/or stolen.
(vii) in the column headed— enter    briefly    the
“Circumstances Under circumstances under
Which Lost” which the article was
stolen and/or lost.
(viii) in the column headed—enter the Station Diary
“Diary Reference” Reference (page and
paragraph number
when the report was
made).
(ix) in the column headed—enter the number of the
“Crime Complaint page   in   the   Crime
Reference” Complaint Book in
which the report of
larceny was entered;
(c) maintain statistical data, for ease of reference, on
the back of the duplicate form in the manner
following:
(i) total value of property reported stolen for the
month;
(ii) total value of property reported lost for the
month;
(iii) total value of stolen property recovered for the
month;
(iv) total value of lost property recovered for the
month;
(e) submit the original forms within forty-eight (48)
hours to the Officer-in-Charge of the Criminal
Investigations Department and Central Records
Office, in cases where the property is identifiable.
4 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 27 Lost and Stolen Property



5. Whenever a report of lost and/or stolen property is made at a
Police Station, it shall be the duty of the Police Officer receiving
the report to—
(a) record the report in the Station Diary with the
following particulars:
(i) the name and address of the person making the
report;
(ii) the description of lost and/or stolen property,
stating value;
(iii) the name and address of the owner of the lost
and/or stolen property;
(iv) the circumstances under which the property
was lost and/or stolen;
(b) fill out the Lost and/or Stolen Property Register in
duplicate during his tour of duty on the said day the
report was made;
(c) in cases of larceny and other larceny related
offences, the relevant Crime Complaint Register
shall be written up.
6. (1) It shall be the duty of the Second Division Officer-in-
Charge of the Charge Room when a report of lost/stolen property
is made at Station to ensure that the particulars mentioned at
paragraph 5 (a) above are sent to the Police Control Room for
transmission and for the information of the Criminal
Investigations Department and Criminal Records Office during
his tour of duty.
(2) (a) However, where such a report requires urgent police
action, it shall be sent at once to the police control for
immediate circulation.
(b) The Second Division Officer-in-Charge of the Control
Room, on receipt of such information shall immedi-
ately circulate the message throughout the Police
Service.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 5
Lost and Stolen Property S.O. No. 27
Responsi-
bility of
Officer
taking the
Report
Transmission
of Lost/Stolen
Property



7. It shall be the responsibility of the Officer-in-Charge of the
Criminal Investigations Department and Criminal Records Office,
on receipt of the original forms as mentioned at paragraph 4(d), to—
(a) ensure that the particulars at the back of the form,
under the caption “Criminal Investigations
Department Reference” are entered as follows:
(i) in the column headed—enter the date on which
“Date Received” the original form was
received from a
Divisional Criminal
Investigations
Department.
(ii) in the column headed—enter the date on which
“Date Circulated” the Criminal Records
Office Circular pub-
lished the lost and/or
stolen property.
(iii) in the column headed— enter  the  Reference
“Criminal Records Number      of      the
Circular Reference” Criminal Office Circu-
lar Records Office on
which the description
of the lost and/or stolen
property is published;
(b) if he thinks fit, circulate the description of the lost
and/or stolen property to the news media;
(c) publish the description of the Lost and/or Stolen
Property in the Criminal Records Office Circular.
8. Whenever lost and/or stolen property is recovered, it shall be
the responsibility of the Second Division Officer-in-Charge of the
Station to ensure—
(a) that the relevant columns in the duplicate of the lost
and/or stolen property book are completed; and
(b) a memorandum containing the following be
forwarded to the Officer-in-Charge of the Criminal
Investigations Department and Criminal Records
Office through his head of Division:
(i) Date recovered; and
(ii) The circumstances under which the property
was recovered.
6 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 27 Lost and Stolen Property
Responsi-
bility of
Officer-in-
Charge of the
Criminal
Records
Office
Recovery of
Lost/Stolen
Property



9. Whenever lost and/or stolen property is recovered, it shall be
the responsibility of the Officer-in-Charge of the Criminal
Investigations Department and Criminal Records Office, on
receipt of the memorandum referred to, to ensure that the
instructions following are complied with:
(a) that the cancellation of the description of the lost
and/or stolen property is published in a Criminal
Records Office Circular; and
(b) that the date of the publication of the cancellation
and the Criminal Records Office Circular Reference
are entered in the column “Date Cancelled and
Referenced” in the Lost and/or Stolen Property Book.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 7
Lost and Stolen Property S.O. No. 27
Cancellation
of Lost/Stolen
Property



8 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 27 Lost and Stolen Property




TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 9
Lost and Stolen Property S.O. No. 27
