TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
STANDING  ORDERS  29
IDENTIFICATION OF SUSPECTS



Identification of Suspects
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
SECTION
1. Methods of Identification
PART  I
IDENTIFICATION PARADE
2. Identification Parade
3. Identification Officer
4. Representative
5. Identification Modes of a Suspect
6. Necessity for Holding Parade
7. Duty of an Officer in Charge of a Parade
8. Preconditions for conducting an Identification Parade
9. Procedure for Holding an Identification Parade
10. Post Parade
11. Uncommon Cases
PART  II
I
DENTIFICATION IN A PUBLIC PLACE
`12. Identification of a Suspect not in Custody
PART  III
IDENTIFICATION BY PHOTOGRAPH
13. Use of Photographs in Identification of Suspects
PART  IV
IDENTIFICATION BY FINGERPRINT
14. Identification by Fingerprint
15. Preservation of Fingerprint at the Scene
2 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 29 Identification of Suspects



1. Identification of suspects can be done by several methods,
however, the most commonly used are:
(a) Identification Parade.
(b) Identification in a public or private place.
(c) Photograph.
(d) Fingerprint.
PART I
IDENTIFICATION PARADE
2. (1) “Identification Parade” refers to an arrangement made
in accordance with the Judges’ Rules and conducted by the police,
for giving a witness an opportunity to identify a suspect by his
physical appearance or other characteristics. Such suspect having
been previously seen or heard by the witness committing an
offence.
(2) An Identification Parade may be held in a room equipped
with or without a “one-way mirror”.
3. (1) “Identification Officer” refers to an officer who has the
responsibility of conducting an Identification Parade.
(2) An Identification Officer shall be either a First Division
Officer or an Inspector.
(3) The Identification Officer shall not be an officer involved
in the investigation of the case.
4. A “Representative” refers to the following persons:
(a) A person whom the suspect elects and shall be either
an Attorney-at-law, friend, interpreter or any other
person nominated by the suspect.
(b) The representative must be present during the  con-
duct of the Identification Parade or whenever the
suspect is to be confronted in a cell or other place.
5. A suspect can be identified on an Identification Parade by his
appearance, voice, physical movements and/or other physical
characteristics.
Methods of
Identification
Identification
Parade
Identification
Officer
Representa-
tive
Identification
Modes of a
Suspect
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 3
Identification of Suspects S.O. No. 29



6. An Identification Parade is necessary where:
(a) the available identification evidence is disputed;
(b) the suspect asks for one and it is practicable to hold
one;
(c) the Officer in charge of the investigation considers
that it would be useful.
7. (1) The Officer in charge of a Division/Criminal Investiga-
tion Department is responsible for ensuring that the rooms are
available for the conduct of identification parades.
(2) The room(s) shall be:
(a) of an appropriate size to accommodate a parade with
not less than fourteen persons standing in line side
by side;
(b) properly lit;
(c) fitted with appropriate entrance and exit in order to
prevent—
(i) witness(es) leaving and entering the parade
room coming into contact with each other;
(ii) witness(es) from seeing participants before
the conduct of the actual parade.
(3) In the case where the room is fitted with a “one-way
mirror”  it must be sound proof. There must be—
(a) adequate accommodation for the suspect’s
representative/Justice of the Peace, witnesses and
other officers assisting in the conduct of the parade;
(b) a functional internal communication system to allow
the identification officer to communicate with the
witness observing the parade and the officer(s)
assisting the parade.
4 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 29 Identification of Suspects
Necessity for
holding
Parade
Duty of an
Officer in
charge of  a
Parade



8. It shall be the duty of an officer preparing to conduct an
Identification Parade, to ensure that the following conditions are
met and the instructions hereunder are complied with:
(a) (i) the physical condition and fittings of the room
to be used for the Identification Parade con-
forms with the instructions in paragraph 7 of
this Order.
(ii) the persons forming the parade shall be placed
in numerical order commencing from one and
counting up to between eight and fourteen,
whichever shall be appropriate.
(iii) ensure that each position to be occupied by the
persons forming the parade is clearly numbered
and visible to the witnesses and/or representa-
tive/Justice of the Peace;
(b) there is a room in which the witnesses can be accom-
modated out of sight of the proceedings of the
parade, and that there is no opportunity for the
witnesses to see the suspect prior to the holding of
the parade;
(c) ensure that the suspect had a reasonable opportunity
“not exceeding twelve (12) hours” to facilitate the
presence of his representative;
(d) members of the parade shall so far as possible
resemble the suspect in terms of race, colour, age,
height and general appearance. In addition the
persons forming the parade shall wear similar type
of clothing as that of the suspect;
(e) if there is one suspect, there shall be not less than
eight (8) persons inclusive of the suspect on the
parade. However, if there are two suspects, there
shall not be less than fourteen (14) persons inclusive
of the suspects;
(f) that a witness cannot—
(i) communicate  with another witness about
the case or see or overhear a witness who
has already inspected the parade;
Preconditions
for conduct-
ing an
identification
Parade 
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 5
Identification of Suspects S.O. No. 29



(ii) see any member of the parade before actu-
ally attending the parade;
(g) inform the suspect that—
(i) there is a crime under investigation and it
is the intention to place him on an
Identification Parade;
(ii) he has a right to have a “representative”
present during the parade;
(iii) witnesses will be called in an attempt to
identify him in connection with the offence;
(iv) he may or may not participate in the
parade. However, if he refuses, he must be
told that the witness(es) will be called inde-
pendently to confront him in a cell or at
another place;
(h) where the conditions at paragraph (g)(iv) exist, the
suspect shall be confronted by each witness who
shall be asked by the Identification Officer “Is this
the person?” Such confrontation shall take place in
the presence of the suspect's representative. In the
absence of a representative the confrontation shall
take place in the presence of a Justice of the Peace.
(i) where the suspect elects a representative, such rep-
resentative shall be informed of the time, date and
place of the Identification Parade and be given a rea-
sonable time to be present at the parade;
(j) in the case where the suspect fails to nominate a rep-
resentative or for any reason the suspect's represen-
tative is absent or unable to attend the parade, the
Identification Parade shall be conducted in the
presence of a Justice of the Peace;
(k) on no account shall the suspect be placed on an
Identification Parade without his representative
being present or in his absence a Justice of the
Peace.
6 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 29 Identification of Suspects



9. Identification officers shall comply with the instructions
hereunder:
(a) ensure that all unauthorised persons are excluded
from the place where the Identification Parade is
being held including—
(i) the investigation officer;
(ii) officers below the rank of Inspector, save and
except any officer not being the investigation
officer, specifically mandated by the identifica-
tion officer to render assistance at the parade;
(iii) witnesses awaiting inspection of the
parade;
(b) arrange for an adequate number of police officers
who are not involved in the investigation to render
assistance at the parade;
(c) assemble the parade in the room allocated;
(d) ensure that the conduct of the parade takes place in the
presence and hearing of the suspect and a representa-
tive, if any, or in the absence of a representative in the
presence and the hearing of a Justice of the Peace;
(e) cause all persons on the parade to face the light,
whether natural or artificial, so that their faces can
be clearly seen by the witness(es),
representative/Justice of the peace;
(f) ensure that the representative does not control or
obstruct the conduct of the parade;
(g) cause the suspect to be brought in and immediately before
the parade proceeds the Identification officer shall—
(i) explain to the suspect the procedures gov-
erning the conduct of the parade and
caution him in the following terms:
“You are not obliged to say anything
unless you wish to do so, but what you
say may be put in writing and given in
evidence”.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 7
Identification of Suspects S.O. No. 29
Procedure for
holding an
identification
parade



(ii) ask the suspect whether he has any objec-
tion to the arrangements for the parade or
to any of the other participants in it;
(iii) inform the suspect that he may obtain
advice from his representative and where
practicable, steps shall be taken to remove
any reasonable grounds of objection;
(iv) inform the suspect that he may select his
own position in the parade line, and may
change his position in the parade line
and his clothing after each witness has
completed his examination;
(h) on completion of the above, fill out the front of the
Identification Parade Form as shown at Appendix
“A” noting any objection or requests made by the
suspect;
(i) during the conduct of the parade, the identification
officer shall at all times be in front of, and facing
the parade in such a way so as not to obstruct the
view of the identifying witness, representa-
tive/Justice of the Peace and shall remain
impassive in both demeanour and expression;
(j) Where a one-way mirror is not used and the
witness wishes to walk along the back of the parade
he may be allowed to do so alone, while the officer
remains in front of the parade;
(k) cause witness(es) to be brought into the parade
room one at a time;
(l) identify himself to the witness and advise him to
face the parade and relate briefly what he saw
and/or heard in connection with the crime;
(m) tell the witness that the suspect may or may not be
on the parade line and if he cannot make a positive
identification he should say so;
(n) (i) where there is a one-way mirror the officer shall
ask the witness to scrutinise the members of the
parade;
8 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 29 Identification of Suspects



(ii) where there is no one-way mirror, ask the
witness to walk along the parade line;
(iii) in both cases, advise the witness to take as
much time and care as he wishes;
(o) ask the witness whether he has completed his
inspection. If his answer is in the affirmative ask
him whether the alleged offender is on the parade
and if so to identify him by number;
(p) should a witness wish to hear any parade member
speak, adopt any specified posture or see him move,
the identification officer shall—
(i) first ask him whether he can identify any
person on the parade on the basis of
appearance only;
(ii) after the witness has so indicated and
whether or not the witness is able to do so,
the identification officer shall ask all the
parade members to comply with the
request of the witness;
(iii) if the witness is unable to identify the
suspect on the basis of appearance only,
request such members of the parade to
comply with the witness’s request;
(q) should the witness point out the suspect he should be
asked to explain briefly what part the suspect took in
the commission of the offence;
(r) indicate on the Identification Parade Form—
(i) the exact words used by the witness when
identifying the suspect;
(ii) the suspect’s name and any remarks made
by him when he was identified;
(s) should the suspected person draw attention to him-
self, for instance, saying “I am the fellow they called
you to identify”, he should be ignored and the parade
proceeded with. If he is identified and charged, his
remarks must be given in evidence.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 9
Identification of Suspects S.O. No. 29



(t) all witnesses must be called to the parade before it is
concluded, even though the suspected person was
identified by previous witnesses attending the
parade;
(u) where a witness makes an identification, the mem-
ber identified shall be so informed and where that
member is the suspect he and his representative, if
any, shall be so informed after the parade has ended.
He shall be cautioned and handed over to the inves-
tigator;
(v) should the suspect make any comments with respect
to the conduct of the parade or otherwise at the con-
clusion of the parade, such comments shall be
recorded by the identification officer and given in
evidence.
10.The identification officer shall, on completion of the
parade—
(a) complete and sign the Identification Parade Form;
(b) make an entry in the Station Diary, stating briefly
what transpired on the parade;
(c) supply the investigator with a copy of his statement
together with a copy of the Identification Parade
Form;
(d) cause further statement(s) to be recorded from the
witness(es) whether the suspect was identified or
not.
11. The identification officer shall pay particular attention to
uncommon cases and take the appropriate action for example, if
the suspect has—
(a) one eye—every member of the parade shall wear eye
shield or bandage over the appropriate eye;
(b) one leg—drape blankets or similar covering waist
high in front of persons paraded;
Post Parade
Uncommon
Cases
10 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 29 Identification of Suspects



(c) one arm—each member slip corresponding arm
from jacket and button over;
(d) wear spectacles—borrow sufficient pairs of
spectacles for persons forming the parade;
(e) is bald—arrange for bald participants or have each
member wear a hat.
PART  II
IDENTIFICATION IN A PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PLACE
12. (1) Identification of a suspect may be made in a public or
private place when the suspect is not in police custody or it is
impossible or impractical to put him on an Identification Parade.
(2) In the circumstances mentioned at Paragraph (1) above
arrangements may be made by the identification officer for the
witness to observe the suspect in the presence of a Justice of the
Peace.
(3) The witness(es) should be taken to the person’s place of
employment or to the area where he lives or frequents or to any
place where they may see him under normal conditions so that
they may or may not identify him.
(4) the witness’s attention should not be directed to any par-
ticular individual during this arrangement.
PART III
I
DENTIFICATION BY PHOTOGRAPH
13. Photographs may be used to assist in establishing the
identity of a suspected person. Whenever it becomes necessary to
use photographs, the following guidelines shall be observed:
(a) photographs must not be used if the suspect is in
custody and it is the intention to place him on an
identification parade;
(b) where there are two or more witnesses who may be
able to identify the suspect, one witness at a time
should be shown the photographs. If one of them
identifies the suspect, the photographs should not be
shown to the other witnesses;
Identification
of a Suspect
not in
Custody
Use of
Photographs
in
Identification
of Suspects
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 11
Identification of Suspects S.O. No. 29



(c) the witness who identified the suspect should be
called to attend the Identification Parade in the
usual manner among the other available witnesses;
(d) the fact that photographs have been used, should
never be mentioned in evidence, in chief, only in
answer to question under cross examination. See the
cases of R. vs. Lawrenson 1961 R. vs. Palmer 1914
and R. vs. Wainwright., 1926;
(e) blocks or groups of photographs, as well as those in
the Rogues Gallery, may be shown to witnesses;
(f) the photographs shown must bear no names,
numbers or marks of any kind that may tend to
indicate or suggest the identity of any particular
photograph;
(g) nothing must be done or said to the witnesses  view-
ing the photographs:
(i) to suggest the photographs are of persons
who have been convicted of crimes;
(ii) to assist in identifying any particular pho-
tograph as that of the person who have
committed the crime;
(h) if an identification has been made of a suspect from
the photographs shown, the block of photographs
shall be preserved for the possible production in
Court.
PART  IV
I
DENTIFICATION BY FINGERPRINT
14. Fingerprints are considered one of the most accurate
means by which an individual can be identified.
(a) Fingerprints of suspects are frequently found on—
(i) the scenes of crimes;
(ii) various surfaces and objects.
(b) Fingerprints are fragile and can be easily destroyed
by the first careless act.
12 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 29 Identification of Suspects
Identification
by
Fingerprint



15. (1) It shall be the duty of the first officer visiting the scene
of a crime to make a request for a fingerprint  expert to visit the
scene and at the same time preserve the scene from wanton
destruction of evidence.
(2) The fingerprint expert visiting the scene, shall make a
thorough search of all objects and surface areas in and around the
scene of the crime that may have the potential of retaining prints.
Preservation
of
Fingerprint
at the Scene
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 13
Identification of Suspects S.O. No. 29



14 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 29 Identification of Suspects



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 15
Identification of Suspects S.O. No. 29



16 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 29 Identification of Suspects



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 17
Identification of Suspects S.O. No. 29
