TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
STANDING  ORDERS  20
MOUNTED BRANCH



Mounted Branch
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
SECTION
1. Mounted Branch 
2. Farrier 
3. Saddler 
4. Application to be transferred to Mounted Branch
5. Training
6. Acquisition of Horses
7. Keeping of Registers—
(a) Register of Horses
(b) Farrier Register
(c) Feeding Book
(d) Sick Horse Register
(e) Pharmacy Register
(f) Saddler’s Repair Book
8. History Sheet/File 
9. Appointment of Training Officers for Remounts 
10. Enlistment of Horses into the Service 
11. Care and Maintenance of Horses— 
(a) Grooming
(b) Feeding and Watering
(c) Shoeing
(d) Sick Horses
12. Stock of Medicine to be Kept
13. Stable Management
14. Harness and Saddle—Issue of
15. Care of Harness and Saddle
16. Responsibility of Officer-in-charge of Mounted Branch
17. General Instructions
18. Disposal of Police Horses
19. Annual Return
2 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 20 Mounted Branch



1. The Mounted Branch is a Specialist Unit within the Service
comprising of Police Officers and horses used as a Support System
to perform such duties as patrols, escorts, crowd control,
ceremonial and includes any other duties as directed by the
Commissioner of Police from time to time.
2. A “Farrier” refers to a person attached to the Mounted Branch
for the purpose of making horses’ shoes and/or the shoding of horses.
3. “Saddler” refers to a person who makes and repairs harness
and saddlery at the Mounted Branch.
4. Police Officers with three (3) or more years service may apply
in writing through the Officer-in-charge of a Division/Branch for
transfer to the Mounted Branch.
5. Successful applicants will be required to undergo a course of
training to the satisfaction of the Officer-in-charge of the Mounted
Branch.
6. Horses for the Police Mounted Branch are obtained from two
(2) sources:
(a) either purchased by the State; or
(b) by gift with the permission of the Commissioner of
Police.
Whenever a horse is acquired in the Service it is
referred to as a “Remount”, given a temporary
number, e.g., R. 1. and goes through a period of
training.
7. Hereunder is a list of Registers which shall be kept at the
Mounted Branch and contain the following information:
(a) Register of Horses
This Register shall contain the full description of the
horse, age when purchased, the price paid, the
source from which it was obtained and the eventual
disposal thereof.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 3
Mounted Branch S.O. No. 20
Mounted
Branch 
Farrier 
Saddler 
Application
to be
transferred
to Mounted
Branch
Training
Acquisition
of Horses
Keeping of
Registers



(b) Farrier Register
This Register will be kept in the Charge Room in
which the Farrier will enter the date the horses were
shod and name of the Farrier by whom they were
shod.
(c) Feeding Register
In this Register shall be recorded the amount of feed
received and issued on a daily basis. At the end of
each month a recapitulation will be entered showing
the amount of feed received, issued, on hand during
the said month, any surplus or deficit and the
amount carried forward to the following month. At
the end of each month the Register will be checked
and certified by a Police Officer designated by the
Officer-in-charge of the Mounted Branch of or above
the rank of Inspector. See Table at Appendix “A”.
(d) Sick Horse Register
In this Register shall be entered the name of the sick
horse, its complaint, medication administered,
attendance of veterinary surgeon and his comments.
(e) Pharmacy Register
In this Register shall be recorded medication
received and issued to the Mounted Branch.
(f) Saddler’s Repair Book
In this Register shall be entered all saddles
collected, delivered and repaired by the Saddler.
All of the above Registers shall be kept by the Officer-in-charge of
the Charge Room of the Mounted Branch with the exception of the
Pharmacy Register which shall be kept by the Officer-in-charge of
the Pharmacy and the Register of Horses shall be kept in the
office of the Officer-in-Charge of Mounted Branch.
4 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 20 Mounted Branch



8. Simultaneously with the recording of the information in the
Register mentioned at paragraph (7) (a) above, a History Sheet/
File as at “Appendix B” in triplicate will be opened on the
acquisition of the horse. The History Sheet shall contain the
information mentioned in the register above and in addition, all
periods of sickness and injury and treatment administered.
9. The Officer-in-charge of the Mounted Branch is responsible
for the selection of suitably qualified officers for the training of
“Remounts”.
10. The remount that has successfully completed a period of
training shall be taken on the strength of the Service and given an
official number and name. The Officer-in-Charge shall submit to
the Commissioner of Police this information for publication in the
Departmental Orders.
11. Horses taken on the strength of the Service shall be cared
for and maintained in the following manner:
(a) Grooming
Grooming refers to the cleaning of the body, head,
tail and legs of a horse with “body brush” and the
mane with a “dandy brush”. The nostrils, sheath and
dock will be sponged, hooves picked and washed out,
ensuring that the heels are at once dried.
The “curry comb” will never be used on the body of
the horse, its purpose being to remove the dirt from
the “body brush”.
At grooming time water is not to be used on the body
of the horse.
(b) Feeding and Watering
(i) Feeding relates to the watering and the
providing of ration in respect of each horse.
(ii) The ration in respect of each horse will be
determined by its size and weight. It will
not exceed eight (8) pounds of broodmere,
three (3) pounds of bran and fifty (50)
pounds of grass daily.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 5
Mounted Branch S.O. No. 20
History
Sheet/File 
Appointment
of Training
Officers for
Remounts 
Enlistment of
Horses into
the Service 
Care and
Maintenance
of Horses



(iii) Horses will be watered before feeding and
whenever they come in from work.
(iv) In each stable shall be kept a table
showing—
(1) the prescribed ration in respect of
each horse;
(2) the hours of feeding and watering;
(3) the daily hours of feeding are as
follows:
8.15 a.m., 11.45 a.m., 3.45 p.m.;
(v) The feed of sick horses will be reduced until
they resume work.
(c) Shoding
(i) Shoding refers to the method by which the
hooves of horses are fitted with “U” shaped
metal shoes to protect the hooves from
injury.
(ii) The shoes of horses shall be examined by
the Second Division Officer-in-charge as
follows:
(1) morning and evening each day;
(2) before and after leaving the
Station on duty.
(iii) The shoes will be fitted to the horse’s hooves
and not the hooves to the shoes.
When hot shoding is being done, care
should be taken not to apply the shoe so hot
as to burn the walls of the hoof.
(d) Sick Horses
(i) When a horse is sick due to injury or illness,
the officer who discovers such illness or
injury shall report his observations to the
Second Division Officer-in-charge and have
all entry made in the Station Diary to this
effect.
6 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 20 Mounted Branch



(ii) Where the injury or illness is of such a
nature that it cannot be treated by the
personnel at Mounted Branch, the Second
Division Officer-in-charge, shall request the
services of the Government Veterinary
Surgeon.
He shall also inform the Officer-in-charge of
the Mounted Branch of the extent of the
injury or illness of the horse and the action
taken by him.
(iii) The instructions of the Veterinary Surgeon
shall be strictly complied with.
(iv) Where horses have contracted cold and any
other infectious disease, they shall be
placed in an area of isolation in an effort to
curb any outbreak of the said disease. A
special receptacle shall be provided to water
and feed an infected horse only.
(v) All items of kit used on a sick horse shall
not be used on other horses except they are
sterilized properly.
12. The Officer-in-charge of Mounted Branch shall consult
with the Government Veterinary Surgeon, from time to time on
the stock of medicine to be kept at the Pharmacy at Mounted
Branch for the treatment of sick horses.
13. Management of the Stables at Mounted Branch must be
done in the following manner:
(a) The stalls and surroundings must always be kept
clean.
(b) No dung or stale shall be left in the stalls while the
horses are being attended to or saddled.
(c) The walls of the stalls, mangers and the horses’
halter must be scrubbed at least once per week.
(d) There must always be a block of rock salt in the
horses’ stalls.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 7
Mounted Branch S.O. No. 20
Stock of
Medicine to
be kept
Stable
Management



(e) The horses stalls and surroundings shall not be
kept in an untidy manner by leaving the rake,
bucket, towel, stable rubber or any other item used
after attending to a horse.
(f) The buckets and all items of tools must always be
washed after use and put in their appropriate
places.
(g) Horses must be secured to the upper rings of their
stalls before being groomed, saddled or otherwise
attended to.
14. (1) Harness and saddle will be issued to each horse as
directed by the Officer-in-charge of the Mounted Branch.
(2) The sets shall be numbered and marked with the date
of issue.
(3) Each set shall be kept together and properly fitted to
the horse for which it has been issued.
15. The instructions hereunder for the care of harness and
saddle are to be strictly observed—
(a) Harness and saddle will be cleaned with a wet
sponge or cloth until all sweat marks and dried hair
are removed.
(b) The reverse or rough side while slightly damp will
be well rubbed with dubbin or saddle soap.
(c) The smooth side will be polished including the baton
and baton case and the billet of white heat ropes.
(d) All brass and nickel fittings will be polished and
shined.
(e) Leather girths shall be cleaned with dubbin or
saddle soap. Canvas girths and head ropes will be
cleaned with white polish.
(f) On the removal of the harness and saddle from the
horse, blankets will be placed in the sun to dry.
When dry they will be well brushed and beaten to
prevent getting hard or caked.
8 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 20 Mounted Branch
Harness and
Saddle—
Issue of
Care of
Harness and
Saddle



(g) Mounted personnel before proceeding on leave
shall—
(i) clean the harness and saddle of the horse
assigned to him, whether temporary or
otherwise;
(ii) ensure that saddles are properly racked
out;
(iii) ensure that the harness is hung out in
front of the horse’s stall.
16. The Officer-in-charge of Mounted Branch shall be
responsible for the general administration of the Branch and shall
assign duties to the personnel under his command.
17. (1) The Second Division Officer-in-charge shall be
responsible for the following:
(a) to inspect daily, the horses, stables and surrounding
areas. He shall make an entry in the Station Diary
by 10.00 a.m. certifying that the inspection has been
carried out;
(b) to inspect the mounted patrols leaving on and
returning off duty. He shall make an entry to this
effect in the Station Diary;
(c) notwithstanding paragraph (b) above, a Mounted
Officer returning to the Branch off duty with a
horse, shall report any observations and
occurrences to the Second Division Officer-in-
charge of the Charge Room;
(d) it shall be the responsibility of the Mounted Officer
in case of injury/damage to person/property, to
submit immediately a report in writing to the
Second Division Officer-in-charge, who shall
forward same with despatch to the Officer-in-
charge of the Mounted Branch.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 9
Mounted Branch S.O. No. 20
Responsi-
bility of
Officer-in-
charge of
Mounted
Branch
General
Instructions



(2) (a) The Commissioner of Police may authorise in
writing any person other than Mounted personnel,
to ride a police horse.
(b) The Mounted Second Division Officer shall ensure
that a horse is properly saddled and equipped
before leaving on a tour of duty.
(c) While on patrol, horses are not to be ridden faster
than a walk, except in cases of emergency.
(d) The Commissioner of Police may require any person
to whom he has granted permission to ride or use a
police horse in any private functions or displays to
enter into a bond of indemnity, indemnifying the
Commissioner of Police and his subordinates from
any action arising from any injury sustained by that
person when riding a police horse.
18. (1) Police horses that have died from natural causes,
diseases or certified as unfit by the Government Veterinary
Surgeon and recommended for euthanasia, shall be struck off the
strength of the Service.
(2) When a horse is to be struck off the strength of the
Service, the following procedure shall be adopted:
(a) The officer in charge of the Branch shall immedi-
ately submit a report to the Commissioner of
Police to which will be attached, the death certifi-
cate of the horse which was euthanised and the
Government Veterinary Surgeon’s report.
(b) The Commissioner of Police, on receipt of the
officer’s report shall submit a report to the
Permanent Secretary, Ministry of National
Security/Accounting Officer seeking approval to
have the dead horse removed from the Register of
Police Horses.
(c) On receipt of the approval from the Ministry, the
Commissioner of Police will instruct that the horse
be struck off the strength of the Service and the
information published in the Departmental
Orders.
10 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 20 Mounted Branch
Disposal of
Police Horses



19. (1) In January of each year the Officer in charge of the
Mounted Branch shall prepare in duplicate an Annual Return of
animals removed from the Register of Police Horses during the
previous year.
(2) This return shall be forwarded to the Commissioner of
Police for onward transmission to the Auditor General and copied
to the Comptroller of Accounts.
(3) The return shall contain the following information:
(a) particulars of the animals which died;
(b) causes of death;
(c) dates of removal from Register;
(d) copies of Death Certificates.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 11
Mounted Branch S.O. No. 20
Annual
Return



12 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 20 Mounted Branch



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 13
Mounted Branch S.O. No. 20



14 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 20 Mounted Branch



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 15
Mounted Branch S.O. No. 20