TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
STANDING  ORDERS  25
CREMATION



Cremation
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
SECTION
1. Cremation
2. Authorised Officer
3. Cremation Forms
4. Application for permit
5. Request for Post Mortem Examination
6. Grounds for refusal of permit by Authorised Officer
7. Duties of the Authorised Officer before granting permit
8. Granting of permits
9. Withdrawal or cancellation of permit
10. Submission of Documents by Authorised Officer
11. Notification of Officer in charge Division where cremation site is located
12. Officer in charge Division where cremation site is located
13. Duties of Officer at cremation site
14. Responsibility of Officer in charge of a Division
15. Guidelines for cremation at the Cinerary
2 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 25 Cremation



1. “Cremation” refers to the lawful disposal of human remains
by burning the same in an approved crematorium or in a pyre
specially constructed for the purpose.
2. “Authorised Officer” refers to the police officer of or above
the rank of Inspector of the Division in which the deceased whose
remains it is intended to cremate lived and includes any other
police officer of or above that rank authorised by the
Commissioner of Police.
3. (1) Forms pertaining to cremation are to be kept at
Divisional Headquarters and Police Stations.
(2) The prescribed forms are as follows:
(a) Form A—Application for a Permit to construct a
funeral pyre and to cremate human remains.
(b) Form B—Permit to construct a funeral pyre and
cremate human remains.
(c) Form C—Certificate of Medical Attendant and
Confirmatory Medical Certificate.
(d) Form D—Certificate of Due Compliance (to be given by
the police officer present at the cremation).
(e) Form E—Certificate after Post Mortem Examination.
Specimens of these prescribed forms are attached at
Appendices “A–E”.
4. On receipt of a request to construct a funeral pyre and to
cremate human remains, an application shall be prepared in
duplicate on the prescribed form called Form “A” to which must be
attached a valid Death Certificate and prescribed Forms “C, D
and E”. However, Form “E” will only be required if a post mortem
is performed on the deceased.
5. It shall be the duty of an authorised officer to delay the
granting of a permit to cremate and, with approval from the Chief
Medical Officer, request a post mortem examination on any
human remains on the occasions following:
(a) where there is reasonable cause to suspect that the
deceased died a violent or unnatural death;
(b) where the deceased died a sudden death;
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 3
Cremation S.O. No. 25
Cremation
Authorised
Officer
Cremation
Forms
Application
for Permit
Request for
Post Mortem
Examination



(c) where the cause of death is unknown; or
(d) where the deceased died in such circumstances as
would require an inquest to be held in pursuance of
law.
6. It shall be the duty of an authorised officer to refuse a
permit to cremate on the occasions following:
(a) when the deceased is known to have left a written
declaration to the contrary; and
(b) when the remains of any human is not properly
identified.
7. It shall be the responsibility of an authorised officer, before
granting a permit to cremate, to ensure the following:
(a) that a Certificate as set out in prescribed Form “C”
has been given by the medical practitioner or where
the death occurred at a hospital, by the medical
officer who attended to the deceased during his last
illness and who can certify definitely as to the cause
of death;
(b) that a confirmatory medical certificate in
accordance with the prescribed Form “C” has been
given by a medical officer who is not a relative of the
deceased or a relative or partner of the medical
practitioner or the medical officer who has given the
certificate referred to at (a) above;
(c) that a certificate has been issued in accordance with
the prescribed Form “E” where a post mortem was
performed; and
(d) that a certificate is produced to the effect that the
death has been duly registered in accordance with
the provisions of the Births and Deaths Registration
Act, Chap. 44:01.
8. The Authorised Officer on being satisfied that the require-
ments at paragraphs 5, 6 and 7 are met, may grant a permit to
construct a funeral pyre and cremate human remains on a pyre or
crematorium.
4 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 25 Cremation
Grounds for
refusal of
permit by
Authorised
Officer
Duties of the
Authorised
Officer before
granting 
permit
Granting of
permits



9. An Authorised Officer may withdraw or cancel a
permit if the holder of the permit fails to comply with
Regulation 11 (a) of the Cremation Regulation, Chap. 30:51
or fails to satisfy any provisions of the Cremation Act,
Chap. 30:51.
10. Where a permit has been issued by an authorised
officer at a Station, he shall be required to submit to the
Officer in charge of his Division the duplicates of all the
prescribed forms submitted in addition to that of the death
certificate within forty-eight (48) hours after issuing the
permit.
11. The Authorised Officer who has granted a permit to
cremate, shall, on behalf of the Officer in charge of his
Division send a message to the Officer in charge of the
Division where the cremation is to take place informing
him:
(a) the time, date and place of the cremation;
(b) to detail a police officer to be present at the
cremation.
12. The Officer in charge of the Division where the
cremation is to take place referred to at paragraph 11
above  shall—
(a) detail a police officer of or above the rank of
Corporal to witness the cremation;
(b) make any other arrangements as the situation
warrants;
(c) on receipt of the duplicate and triplicate of
Form “D”, send the duplicate to the Minister of
Local Government and the triplicate to the
authorised officer who issued the permit for
the cremation for the purpose of filing.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 5
Cremation S.O. No. 25
Withdrawal
or cancella-
tion of
permit
Submission
of documents
by authorised
officer
Notification
of Officer in
charge
Division
where crema-
tion site is
located
Officer in
charge
Division
where crema-
tion site is
located



13. It shall be the duty of the police officer designated to carry
out duties at a cremation site, to ensure that the conditions
following are adhered to:
(a) that the site on which the pyre is constructed, is the
approved site as mentioned in the permit;
(b) that the cremation is conducted by the holder of the
permit;
(c) that an Officer  designated by the Minister of Health
is present to ensure that the provisions of the Public
Health Ordinance are carried out in accordance with
Regulation 10 of the Cremation Regulations,
Chap. 30:51; and
(d) prepare Form “D”, a copy of which is attached at
Appendix “D”, in triplicate which shall be submitted
within twenty-four (24) hours in the following
manner:
(i) the original is to be issued to the holder of
the cremation permit;
(ii) the duplicate and triplicate copies are to be
submitted to the Officer in charge of his
Division.
14. Whenever a permit to cremate has been granted, it shall be
the responsibility of the Officer in charge of that Division to—
(a) file medical and death certificates, copy of applica-
tion, permit and other documents pertaining to the
cremation;
(b) detail a police officer not below the rank of Corporal
for duty at the cremation site where the cremation is
taking place in his Division;
(c) on receipt of the duplicate and triplicate of Form “D”,
send the duplicate copy to the Minister responsible
for Local Government and file the triplicate copy as
at (a) above;
6 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 25 Cremation
Duties of
officer at
cremation
site
Responsi-
bility of
Officer in
charge of
a Division



(d) make available for inspection, documents at (a)
above to any person appointed for that purpose by
the Minister responsible for Local Government
and/or the Commissioner of Police in accordance
with Regulation 17(1) of the Cremation Regulations,
Chap. 30:51;
(e) destroy all documents at (a) above, if he thinks fit,
after a period of fifteen (15) years after the date of
cremation in accordance with Regulation 17(2) of the
Cremation Regulations, Chap. 30:51.
15. Attached at  Appendix “F” are the guidelines for cremation
at the Cinerary—
(a) First obtain the necessary four (4) Forms from either
the Cinerary, your District Medical Officer, the
nearest Police Station or the hospital nearest you.
(b) The application form (i.e., Form “A”) must be filled
out and signed by the nearest living relative or
executor and a witness.
(c) The medical forms—Certificate of Medical
Attendant, Confirmatory Medical Certificate and
where applicable Form “E”—Certificate After Post
Mortem Examination are to be signed and officially
stamped by not less than two medical practitioners,
i.e., the attending physician and either the District
Medical Officer or Institution Doctor.
(d) The above completed forms are to be taken to the
District Police Station, where, when approved, a
permit to cremate will be issued.
(e) The applicant must make payment to the Cashier at
City Hall, Knox Street, Port-of-Spain, using Bill
supplied by the Cinerary between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. (Cashier closes business at
2:00 p.m.).
(f) Finally, all documents along with the receipt for
payment are to be returned to the Cinerary where a
confirmed date and time will be given for cremation.
Guidelines
for cremation
at the
Cinerary
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 7
Cremation S.O. No. 25



ATTENTION: DISTRICT POLICE
Please be guided by the Cremation Act, Part I, paragraphs 13
and 17 and Part II paragraph 34  and copy all documents—for-
warding the Originals to the Cinerary before the appointed date
and time of Cremation—yourselves—retaining the copies for your
records.
8 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 25 Cremation



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 9
Cremation S.O. No. 25



10 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 25 Cremation



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 11
Cremation S.O. No. 25



12 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 25 Cremation




TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 13
Cremation S.O. No. 25
Date



14 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 25 Cremation




TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 15
Cremation S.O. No. 25




16 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 25 Cremation
