TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
STANDING  ORDERS  23
CORRESPONDENCE



Correspondence
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
SECTION
1. Correspondence
2. Minute
3. Minutes on Correspondence
4. File
5. Filing
6. Folio Procedure
7. Dealing with Correspondence
8. Recording of Correspondence
9. Registers—
(1) Incoming Correspondence Register
(2) Outgoing Correspondence Register
(3) Filing Correspondence Register
10. Responsibility of the Officer in charge of Division/Branch
11. Responsibility of Second Division Officer-in-charge of Station
12. Responsibility of Second Division Officer
13. Confidential Correspondence
14. Dealing with Confidential Correspondence
15. Correspondence for Investigation
16. Forwarding of Correspondence
17. Filing of Correspondence
2 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 23 Correspondence



1. “Correspondence” refers to any document which has been
received by any member of the Police Service from members of the
public or some other member of the Police Service or any docu-
ment submitted by the Police Service to some destination within
or outside of the Service.
2. A “Minute” refers to a note addressed to an office holder or
individual, written beneath a correspondence reflecting some
requests, instructions or response in relation to the said
correspondence. See Appendix “A”.
3. Minutes on all correspondence shall be dealt with as
follows:
(a) written in blue/black ink;
(b) numbered consecutively;
(c) bear the signature of the officer writing the Minute;
(d) bear the date upon which the Minute was written.
4. “File” refers to a collection of related documents kept
together and classified in an orderly manner.
5. “Filing” refers to the system by which the related docu-
ments are kept and classified.
6. (1) “Folio” refers to an independent document in a file
which relates to the correspondence. See Appendix  “A”.
(2) The procedures to be adopted when placing a folio in a
file are—
(a) a folio number on the independent document must
be written in red ink;
(b) the folio entry on the Minute Sheet shall also be
written in red ink and shall include the date appear-
ing on the document;
(c) folio entries shall be numbered independently from
Minutes;
(d) they shall be recorded in a consecutive manner;
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 3
Correspondence S.O. No. 23
Correspond-
ence
Minute
Minutes on
Correspond-
ence
File
Filing
Folio
Procedure



(e) the number on the independent document shall
correspond with the said folio number on the Minute
Sheet.
7. Correspondence is important and shall be dealt with
promptly in accordance with its contents and/or last Minute.
8. (1) Correspondence received and despatched shall be
recorded and/or filed.
(2) The recording of correspondence shall be undertaken in
three (3) principal registers, viz: Incoming, Outgoing and Filing
Registers. Such registers are to be kept at Divisions/
Branches/Stations/Sections in accordance with the specimens
set out in Appendices “B”, “C” and “D” attached.
9. The principal registers and their purposes are as follows:
(1) Incoming Correspondence Register
Recording all correspondence received internally or
externally.
(2) Outgoing Correspondence Register
Recording all correspondence which leaves a
Division/Branch/Station/Section for some other
designated place and includes the movements of
correspondence within a Branch/Section.
(3) Filing Correspondence Register
Recording all correspondence for which instructions
have been given to be filed.
In addition to the above registers, Heads of Divisions/
Branches may open other registers to facilitate ease of reference
in tracing correspondence.
10. It shall be the responsibility of the Officer in charge of a
Division/Branch to ensure that correspondence is delivered and
collected daily to and from the offices of the executive officers and
from the Commissioner’s Office at the Administration Building,
Port-of-Spain.
Dealing with
Correspond-
ence
Recording of
Correspond-
ence
Registers
Responsi-
bility of the
Officer in
charge of
Division/
Branch
4 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 23 Correspondence



11. The Second Division Officer-in-charge of a Station shall be
responsible for ensuring that correspondence is delivered to, and
collected from the Divisional Branch Office daily.
12.The Second Division Officer-in-charge of Station/Office shall
be responsible for ensuring that the Correspondence Registers are
properly maintained in the following manner:
(1) Incoming Register—
(a) record and number consecutively all correspond-
ence at the time of receipt;
(b) stamp correspondence with the official stamp;
(c) enter within the stamp, the date, the number
corresponding with the entry in the incoming
register;
(d) despatch the correspondence promptly to its
destination.
(2) Outgoing Register—
(a) record correspondence and reference number at
the time of despatch;
(b) obtain a signature from the receiver except
where it is sent by post.
(3) Filing Register—
(a) record all correspondence for which instructions
have been given to file.
13. Correspondence marked/stamped “Confidential, Secret or
Personal and Confidential” shall only be opened by the holder of
the office or the individual to whom it is addressed.
14. Correspondence of a confidential nature may be dealt with
by an officer authorised by the officer to whom it is addressed.
15. (1) Correspondence requiring investigation received by the
Officer in charge of Division/Branch or Second Division Officer-in-
charge of station shall be investigated by such officer or he may
appoint an officer to conduct such an investigation.
Responsibility
of Second
Division
Officer-in-
charge of
Station
Responsibility
of Second
Division
Officer
Confidential
correspond-
ence
Dealing with
Confidential
Correspond-
ence
Correspond-
ence for
Investigation
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 5
Correspondence S.O. No. 23



(2) Correspondence sent to a Police Officer for investi-
gation, shall be immediately dealt with in accordance with the
instructions given therein.
16. Correspondence shall be forwarded by way of a Minute
written beneath the correspondence or the preceding Minute.
17. It shall be the responsibility of the Officer in charge of the
Correspondence of a Division/Branch or Second Division Officer-
in-charge of a Station to ensure that all correspondence in which
action has been taken is filed in accordance with instructions
given by the officer from whom the correspondence originated.
Forwarding of
Correspond-
ence
Filing of
Correspond-
ence
6 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 23 Correspondence



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 7
Correspondence S.O. No. 23




8 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 23 Correspondence




TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 9
Correspondence S.O. No. 23
