TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
STANDING  ORDERS  33
MENTALLY ILL PERSONS



Mentally  Ill  Persons
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
SECTION
1. Mentally Ill Person
2. Mental Health Officer
3. Detained Mentally Ill Person
4. Assistance by Police Officer
5. Breach of the Peace committed by Mentally Ill Persons
6. Request for a written statement
7. Obtaining a Remand Warrant and Conveyance
8. Report to be submitted on committal
9. Responsibility of the Officer in charge
2 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 33 Mentally Ill Persons



1. “Mentally Ill Person” refers to a person who is suffering from
such a disorder of the mind that he requires care, supervision,
treatment and control or any combination of treatment to these
problems for his own protection or welfare or for the protection or
welfare of others.
2. “Mental Health Officer” refers to a person designated as such
under section 61(1) of the Mental Health Act, Chap. 28:02. That is
to say—
(a) Psychiatric Social Workers;
(b) Registered Mental Nurses;
(c) District Health Visitors;
(d) Other Nurses with equivalent training and experi-
ence as District Health Visitors.
With respect to the persons mentioned at (b), (c) and (d), they
must have at least six (6) months supervised experience in Social
Work and Psychiatric Nursing.
3. Where a person in police custody is suspected to be mentally
ill and his demeanour and/or behaviour is of a nature that is
likely to cause injury to himself or other persons in custody, or
who may be in his/her proximity, it shall be the responsibility of
the Second Division Officer-in-charge of the Station/Branch to:
(a) ensure that the mentally ill person is separated from
other persons in custody;
(b) solicit the assistance of a Mental Health Officer to
have such mentally ill person taken to a hospital for
medical attention.
4. (1) A police officer shall render assistance on the following
occasions:
(a) when required by a Mental Health Officer;
(b) when called upon by a member of the family,
friend, legal guardian or relative of the
mentally ill person;
(c) when a request is made by any member of the
public.
Mentally Ill
Person
Mental
Health
Officer
Detained
Mentally Ill
Person
Assistance by
Police Officer
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 3
Mentally Ill Persons S.O. No. 33



(2) A police officer shall render such assistance as may be
necessary, for the apprehension and safe conveyance of the men-
tally ill person to a Psychiatric Hospital or an approved Medical
Institution designated for handling such cases or to a Police
Station, whichever is applicable.
5. Where a mentally ill person has committed a breach of the
peace, a police officer shall apprehend him and as soon as
practicable afterwards, take him before a court of competent
jurisdiction to be dealt with according to law.
6. A police officer shall not request a mentally ill person to give
and/or sign a written statement except on the advice of a
Psychiatrist.
7. Where a mentally ill person is charged with an offence and
ordered by the court to be kept at a mental institution, it shall be
the duty of the Court Prosecutor, in the case of the Magistrate’s
Court, or the Senior Second Division Officer performing duty in
the High Court to ensure the following:
(a) that the Remand Warrant is obtained on the day of
the court’s order;
(b) that the person is kept at the most suitable station
nearest to the court, pending the receipt of the
legal document for conveyance to the institution
designated for detention;
(c) that the mentally ill person is conveyed to the
designated institution or place of detention on the
day of the court’s order.
8. Where a mentally ill person is kept at a medical institution
on an order from the court, it shall be the duty of the complainant
to submit a report, within two (2) days of the Court’s Order, to the
Officer in charge of Court and Process Branch, Port-of-Spain
through the Officer in charge of the Division/Branch to which he
is attached. The contents of the report shall include the following:
(a) the date on which the person was committed to the
institution;
Breach of the
Peace com-
mitted by
Mentally Ill
Persons
Request for a
written state-
ment
Obtaining a
Remand
Warrant and
Conveyance
Report to be
submitted on
committal
4 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 33 Mentally Ill Persons



(b) the name and address of the institution;
(c) the offence for which the person is charged;
(d) the date on which the person is required to attend
court;
(e) the court at which the person is due to appear.
9. It shall be the responsibility of the Officer in charge of Court
and Process Branch to ensure that the person mentioned at
paragraph (8) of this Order, is transported to the particular Court
on the date on which he is required to attend.
Responsi-
bility of the
Officer in
charge
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 5
Mentally Ill Persons S.O. No. 33