TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
STANDING  ORDERS  32
STATEMENTS



Statements
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
SECTION
1. Statements
2. Prepared Statements
3. Purpose for a Written Statement
4. Types of Statements recorded by Police Officers
(i) WITNESS STATEMENT
(a) Supporting Statement
(b) Negative Statement
(2) GUIDELINES FOR RECORDING STATEMENTS
(3) WITNESS STATEMENTS—MENTALLY HANDICAPPED, CHILD,
PERSON SPEAKING A FOREIGN LANGUAGE
(a) Recording a Statement from a Mentally Handicapped Person
(b) Recording a Statement from a Child
(c) Recording a Statement from a Person Speaking a Foreign
Language:
(ii) DYING DECLARATION
(2) PROCEDURE FOR RECORDING A DYING DECLARATION
(3) DYING DECLARATION HANDED OVER TO POLICE OFFICERS
(iii) STATEMENT UNDER CAUTION (JUDGES’ RULES) RECORDING
OF STATEMENTS UNDER CAUTION
APPENDIX  “A”
J
UDGES RULES
AND
ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTIONS
TO THE POLICE
ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTIONS ON INTERROGATION
AND THE TAKING OF STATEMENTS
1. Procedure generally
2. Record of interrogation
3. Comfort and refreshment
4. Interrogation of children and young persons
5. Interrogation of foreigners
6. Authentication of statements of suspected or accused persons
7. Supply to accused persons of written statement of charges
8. Facilities for defence
2 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 32 Statements



1. (1) A “Statement” refers to the information whether oral or
written made by a person concerning a matter under investigation.
(2) Statements can be prepared by witnesses and handed
over to the police or recorded by Police Officers.
2. (1) A Police Officer shall do the following when a witness
prepares his statement and hands it over to him:
(a) ask the witness to read over his statement. If he
refuses, read it over to him;
(b) on completion, ask him if he wishes to correct, alter
or add anything to his statement;
(c) if the statement was not signed, ask the witness to
sign it and affix the date beneath his signature;
(d) enter a certificate as written hereunder after the
signature and date of the witness—
CERTIFICATE TO BE ENTERED WHEN THE STATEMENT IS
ALREADY PREPARED BY THE WITNESS
“I hereby  certifying, having received this prepared statement
from JOHN BROWN at Belmont Police Station on Wednesday 9th
June, 1993 at 9.00 a.m.
He read it over/I read it over to him, and he said it was correct and
signed it/made his mark/refused to sign it* (as the case may be).
Signed JOHN FRASER 
Police Constable No. 11211 
9. 6. 93
*Delete that which is not applicable
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 3
Statements S.O. No. 32
Statements
Prepared
Statements



(2) A Police Officer shall do the following, where he receives
a prepared statement on behalf of a witness:
(a) verify the authenticity of the statement with the
witness;
(b) certify the statement.
3. The purposes for a written statement are as follows:
(a) to elicit all available information from a witness;
(b) to convey all available information to police
authority;
(c) to determine what action should be taken;
(d) to assist in the examination of witnesses at court;
(e) to justify the action taken by the police.
4. Statements recorded by police officers are of three (3) types—
(a) Witness Statement
(b) Dying Declaration
(c) Statement Under Caution (Judges’ Rules)
(i) WITNESS  STATEMENT
(1) Witness Statements include “supporting”
and “negative” statements.
(a) Supporting Statement
Supporting statement is one
which supports, confirms or cor-
roborates a matter under investi-
gation.
(b) Negative Statement
A Negative Statement is one
which does not support, confirm
nor corroborate a matter under
investigation.
Purpose for a
Written
Statement
Types of
Statements
recorded by
Police
Officers
4 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 32 Statements



(2) GUIDELINES FOR RECORDING
STATEMENTS
Police Officers when recording statements
shall do the following:
(a) record the full name including
“aliases”, age, proper address and
occupation of the person giving the
statement;
(b) after recording the statement, the
witness should be invited to read it
over himself or it shall be read
carefully to the witness;
(c) ensure that all additions, correc-
tions and alterations to the state-
ment are initialled by the witness;
(d) advise the witness to sign and date
the statement at the bottom of each
completed page and at the end of
the statement. In the case of a
person who cannot sign his name,
he should be asked to make his
“mark” or place his “thumb print”
in the areas specified;
(e) on completion, a certificate as out-
lined hereunder shall be entered
after the signature and date of the
witness:
“I hereby certify that I took this statement from JOHN BROWN at
Picton Road, Laventille, on Wednesday 9th July, 1993.
He read it over/I read it over to him, he said it was correct and*
signed it/made his mark/or refused to sign it.” (as the case may
be)
Signed JOHN FRASER
Police Constable No. 12111
9.7.93
*Delete that which is not applicable
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 5
Statements S.O. No. 32



(3) WITNESS STATEMENTS—MENTALLY SUB-
NORMAL, CHILD, PERSON SPEAKING A
FOREIGN LANGUAGE
Witness Statements can also be recorded
from a mentally handicapped person, a
child and persons speaking a foreign
language through an interpreter.
(a) Recording a statement from a
mentally sub-normal person
It shall be the duty of a police officer
who is required to record a state-
ment from a person who appears to
be mentally handicapped, to ensure
that that person’s parent or
guardian or an adult who appears
to be mentally handicapped, to
ensure that that person’s parent or
guardian or an adult (who is not a
police officer) is present during the
recording of the statement and that
the statement is also signed by that
parent or guardian or adult.
(b) Recording a statement from a child
(i) It shall be the duty of a
police  officer recording a
statement from a child to do
so in the presence of a par-
ent, or guardian, or in their
absence, an adult who is of
the same sex of the child.
(ii) A police officer shall not
record a statement from a
child at school. If it is
absolutely necessary, this
shall be done with the
consent and in the presence
of the Principal or his
nominee.
6 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 32 Statements



(c) Recording a statement from a per-
son speaking a foreign language
(i) In the case of a person mak-
ing a statement in a lan-
guage other than English, it
shall be the duty of a police
officer, to request the servic-
es of an interpreter.
(ii) It shall be the duty of the
police officer to ensure that
the interpreter—
(a) records the statement
in the language in
which it is made;
(b) causes the person
making the statement
to sign or make his
mark on the  original;
and
(c) makes an official
English translation of
the original statement.
(ii) DYING DECLARATION
(1) Dying Declaration is a statement
either oral or written made by an
injured and dying person concerning
the circumstances under which he
received such injuries and at the time
of making it he was under a settled,
hopeless expectation of death. It can
be made to anyone including police
officers.
The grounds on which a dying
declaration is admissible in evidence
in a court are set out hereunder—
(a) it must be made by the
declarant;
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 7
Statements S.O. No. 32



(b) the declarant must be under a
settled hopeless expectation of
death;
(c) the death of the declarant has
intervened between the time
after which the statement was
recorded and the trial;
(d) the accused is subsequently
charged with murder or
manslaughter of the declar-
ant;
(e) the declarant would have been
competent to give evidence if
he had been alive;
(f) the statement must be com-
plete and relates to the death.
Thus if the declarant collapses
or becomes comatose before
completion, the whole state-
ment is excluded.
(3) PROCEDURE FOR RECORDING A DYING
DECLARATION
Police officers recording a dying declara-
tion shall do the following:
(a) record the statement in the exact
words of the speaker;
(b) request the signature of the
declarant if he is capable of writ-
ing it;
(c) request other persons witnessing
the statement to sign same;
(d) certify the statement whether it is
completed or not as to the time,
date and place of such statement
being recorded.
8 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 32 Statements



(4) DYING DECLARATION HANDED OVER TO
POLICE OFFICERS
In the case where a police officer receives a
dying declaration which was recorded by a
person other than a police officer, the
officer receiving such statement shall—
(a) record a certificate indicating the
time, date and place and from
whom it was received;
(b) take a statement from the person
who recorded the declaration.
(iii) STATEMENT UNDER CAUTION (JUDGES’
RULES)
(1) A “Statement under caution” refers to a
statement made voluntarily by a person
suspected of having committed a crime, a
person charged, or a person informed that
he is to be charged after he has been cau-
tioned in accordance with the Judges’
Rules.
RECORDING OF STATEMENTS UNDER
CAUTION
(2) Police officers recording statements under
caution including confessions, shall comply
with the Judges’ Rules and the
Administrative Directions on interrogation
and the taking of statements as shown at
Appendix “A”.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 9
Statements S.O. No. 32



APPENDIX  “A”
JUDGES RULES AND ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTIONS TO THE POLICE
These Rules do not affect the principles—
(a) that citizens have a duty to help a police officer to
discover and apprehend offenders;
(b) that police officers otherwise than by arrest, cannot
compel any person against his will to come to or
remain in any police station;
(c) that every person at any stage of an investigation
should be able to communicate and to consult
privately with an Attorney-at-law. This is so even if
he is in custody provided that in such a case no
unreasonable delay or hindrance is caused to the
processes of investigation or the administration of
justice by his doing so;
(d) That when a police officer who is making enquiries of
any person about an offence has enough evidence to
prefer a charge against that person for the offence, he
should without delay cause that person to be charged
or informed that he may be prosecuted for the
offence;
(e) that it is a fundamental condition of the
admissibility in evidence against any person, equally
of any oral answer given by that person to a question
put by a police officer and of any statement made by
that person, that it shall have been voluntary, in the
sense that it has not been obtained from him by fear
of prejudice or hope of advantage exercised or held
out by a person in authority, or by oppression.
The principle set out in paragraph (e) above is overriding and
applicable in all cases. Within that principle the following Rules
are put forward as a guide to police officers conducting investiga-
tions. Non-conformity with these Rules may render answers and
10 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 32 Statements



statements liable to be excluded from evidence in subsequent
criminal proceedings:
I. When a police officer is trying to discover whether
or by whom, an offence has been committed he is
entitled to question any person, whether “suspected
or not”, from whom he thinks that useful informa-
tion may be obtained. Subject to Rule II hereunder,
he is so entitled whether or not the person in ques-
tion has been taken into custody so long as he has
not been charged with the offence or informed that
he may be prosecuted for it.
II. As soon as a police officer has evidence which would
afford reasonable grounds for suspecting that a per-
son has committed an offence, he shall caution that
person or cause him to be cautioned before putting
to him any questions or further questions, relating
to that offence.
The caution shall be in the following terms:
“You are not obliged to say anything unless you wish
to do so but what you say may be put into writing
and given in evidence.”.
When after being cautioned a person is being ques-
tioned, or elects to make a statement, a record shall
be kept of the time and place at which any such
questioning or statement begin and ended and of the
persons present.
III. (a) Where a person is charged with or informed
that he may be prosecuted for an offence he
shall be cautioned in the following terms:
“ Do you wish to say anything? You are not
obliged to say anything unless you wish to do so
but whatever you say will be taken down in
writing and may be given in evidence.”.
(b) It is only in exceptional cases that questions
relating to the offence should be put to the
accused person after he has been charged or
informed that he may be prosecuted. Such
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 11
Statements S.O. No. 32



questions may be put where they are
necessary for the purpose of preventing or min-
imising harm or loss to some other person or to
the public or for clearing up an ambiguity in a
previous answer or statement.
Any questions put and answers given relating to
the offence must be contemporaneously recorded
in full and the record signed by that person or, if
he refuses, by the interrogating officer.
(c) When such a person is being questioned, or
elects to make a statement, a record shall be
kept of the time and place at which any
questioning or statement began and ended and
of the persons present.
IV. Nothing in Rules I and II shall render any state-
ment inadmissible in evidence merely because no
caution was given, provided that it is made before
there is time to caution the person making it, but in
any such case he should be cautioned as soon as
possible.
V. All written statements made after caution shall be
taken in the following manner:
(a) If a person says that he wants to make a state-
ment he shall be told that it is intended to
make a written record of what he says. He shall
always be asked whether he wishes to write
down himself what he wants to say; if he says
that he cannot write or that he would like
someone to write it for him, a police officer may
offer to write the statement for him. If he
accepts the offer the police officer shall, before
starting, ask the person making the statement
to sign or make his mark to the following:
“I wish to make a statement. I want some-
one to write down what I say. I have been
told that I need not say anything unless I
wish to do so and that whatever I say may
be given in evidence.”.
12 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 32 Statements



(b) Any person writing his own statement
shall be allowed to do so without any
prompting as distinct from indicating to
him what matters are material.
(c) The person making the statement, if he is
going to write it himself, shall be asked to
write out and sign, before writing what he
wants to say, the following:
“I make this statement of my own free will.
I have been told that I need not say any-
thing unless I wish to do so and that what-
ever I say may be given in evidence.”.
(d) Whenever a police officer writes the state-
ment, he shall take down the exact words
spoken by the person making the state-
ment, without putting any questions other
than such as may be needed to make the
statement coherent, intelligible and rele-
vant to the material matters: he shall not
prompt him.
(e) When the writing of a statement by a
police officer is finished the person making
it shall be asked to read it and to make any
corrections, alterations or additions he
wishes. When he has finished reading it he
shall be asked to write and sign or make
his mark on the following Certificate at the
end of the statement:
“I have read the above statement and I have
been told that I can correct, alter or add
anything I wish. This statement is mine. I
have made it of my own free will.”.
(f) If the person who has made a statement, having
read it, refuses to write the above-mentioned
Certificate at the end of it or to sign it, the senior
police officer present shall record on the state-
ment itself and in the presence of the person
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 13
Statements S.O. No. 32



making it, what has happened. If the person
making the statement cannot read, or refuses to
read it, the officer who has taken it down shall
read it over to him and ask whether he would
like to correct, alter or add anything and to put
his signature or make his mark at the end. The
police officer shall then certify on the statement
itself what he has done.
VI. If at any time after a person has been charged with or has
been informed that he may be prosecuted for an offence a
police officer wishes to bring to the notice of that person any
written statement made by another person who in respect
of the same offence has also been charged or informed that
he may be prosecuted, he shall hand to that person a true
copy of such written statement but nothing shall be said or
done to invite any reply or comment. If that person says
that he would like to make a statement in reply, or starts to
say something, he shall at once be cautioned or further
cautioned as prescribed by Rule 111(a).
VII Persons other than police officers charged with the duty of
investigating offences or charging offenders shall, so far as
may be practicable, comply with these Rules.
A
DMINISTRATIVE DIRECTIONS ON INTERROGATION
AND THE TAKING OF STATEMENTS
1. Procedure generally
(a) When possible statements of persons under caution
should be written on the forms provided for the pur-
pose. Police Officers’ notebooks should be used for
taking statements only when no forms are available.
(b) When a person is being questioned or elects to make
a statement, a record should be kept of the time or
times at which, during the questioning or making of
a statement there were intervals or refreshment was
taken. The nature of the refreshment should be
noted. In no circumstances should alcoholic drink be
given.
14 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 32 Statements



(c) In writing down a statement the words used should
not be translated into “official” vocabulary; this may
give a misleading impression of the genuineness of
the statement.
(d) Care should be taken to avoid any suggestion that
the person’s answers can only be used in evidence
against him, as this may prevent an innocent person
making a statement which might help to clear him
of the charge.
2. Record of interrogation
Rule II and Rule III (c) demand that a record should be kept of
the following matters and preserved for future evidence:
(a) When, after being cautioned in accordance with Rule
II the person is being questioned or elects to make a
statement a record of the time and place at which
any such questioning began and ended and of the
persons present.
(b) When, after being cautioned in accordance with Rule
III(a) or (b) a person is being questioned or elects to
make a statement a record of the time and place at
which any questioning and statement began and
ended and of the persons present. 
In addition to the records required by these Rules full records
of the following matters should additionally be kept:
(a) of the time or times at which cautions were taken;
(b) of the time when a charge was made and/or the
person was arrested; and
(c) of the matters referred to in paragraph 1 (b) above.
If two or more police officers are present when the questions
are being put or the statement made, the records made should be
countersigned by the other officers present.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 15
Statements S.O. No. 32



3. Comfort and refreshment
Reasonable arrangements should be made for the comfort and
refreshment of persons in attendance for questioning or from
whom statements are being taken. Whenever practicable both the
person being questioned or making a statement and the officers
asking the questions or taking the statement should be seated.
4. Interrogation of children and young persons
As far as practicable children (whether suspected of an offence
or not) should only be interviewed in the presence of a parent or
guardian, or, in their absence, some person who is not a police
officer and is of the same sex as the child. A child or young person
should not be arrested, nor even interviewed at school if such
action can possibly be avoided. Where it is found essential to con-
duct the interview at school, this should be done only with the con-
sent and in the presence of the head teacher or his nominee.
5. Interrogation of foreigners
In the case of a foreigner making a statement in his native
language:
(a) The interpreter should take down the statement in
the language in which it is made.
(b) An official English translation should be made in
due course and be proved as an exhibit with the orig-
inal statement.
(c) The foreigner should sign the statement at (a).
Apart from the question of apparent unfairness, to obtain the
signature of a suspect to an English translation of what he said in
a foreign language can have little or no value as evidence if the
suspect disputes the accuracy of this record of his statement.
6. Authentication of statements of suspected or accused
persons
As far as practicable, and most especially in cases of serious
crime, statements by persons under suspicion or charge should be
authenticated by a senior police officer or by some responsible
16 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 32 Statements



member of the community who shall certify thereon whether the
person who gives any such statement acknowledges that he gave
it voluntarily.
7. Supply  to  accused  persons  of  written  statement  of
charges
(a) The following procedure should be adopted when-
ever a charge is preferred against a person arrested
without warrant for any offence:
As soon as a charge has been accepted by the appropriate police
officer, the accused person should be given a written notice
containing a copy of the entry in the charge sheet or book giving
particulars of the offence with which he is charged. So far as
possible the particulars of the charge should be stated in simple
language so that the accused person may understand it, but they
should also show clearly the precise offence in law with which he
is charged. Where the offence charged is a statutory one, it should
be sufficient for the latter purpose to quote the section of the
statute which created the offence. The written notice should
include some statement on the lines of the caution given orally to
the accused person in accordance with the judges’ Rules after a
charge has been preferred. It is suggested that the form of notice
should begin with the following words:
“You are charged with the offence(s) shown below.
You are not obliged to say anything unless you wish
to do so, but whatever you say will be taken down in
writing and may be given in evidence”.
(b) Once the accused person has appeared before the court it
is not necessary to serve him with a written notice of any
further charges which may be preferred. If, however,
the police decide, before he has appeared before a court, to
modify the charge or to prefer further charges, it is
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 17
Statements S.O. No. 32



desirable that the person concerned should be formally
charged with the     further offence and given a written copy
of the charge as soon as it is possible to do so having regard
to the particular circumstances of the case. If the accused
person has then been released on bail, it may not always be
practicable or reasonable to prefer the new charge at once,
and in cases where he is due to surrender to his bail with-
in forty-eight hours or in other cases of difficulty it will be
sufficient for him to be formally charged with the  further
offence and served with a written notice of the charge after
he has surrendered to his bail and before 'he appears before
the court.
8. Facilities for defence
(a) A person in custody should be allowed to speak on the
telephone to his solicitor or counsel or to his friend
provided that no hindrance is reasonably likely to be caused
to the processes of investigation, or the administration of
justice by his doing so.
He should be supplied on request with writing materials
and his letters should be sent by post or otherwise with the
least possible delay. Additionally, telegrams should be sent
at once, at his own expense .
(b) Persons in custody should not only be informed orally of the
rights and facilities available to them, but in addition,
notices describing them should be displayed at convenient
and conspicuous places at police stations and the attention
of persons in custody should be drawn to these notices.
18 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 32 Statements