TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE SERVICE
STANDING  ORDERS  35
PLAYING/BEATING OF DRUMS AND CONTROL OF MUSIC



Playing/Beating of Drums and Control of Music
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
SECTION
1. Public Place
2. Application for Licence
3. Duties of the Second Division Officer investigating the application
4. Submission of findings
5. Decision of the Officer in charge of the Division
2 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 35 Playing/Beating of Drums and Control of Music



1. A “Public Place” includes any highway and any other
premises or place to which at the material time, members of the
public have or are permitted to have access, whether on payment
or otherwise.
2. The First Division Officer in charge of a Division, on receipt
of an application for a licence to—
(a) play drums, or to assemble or dance to any drum,
gong, tambour, bangee, chac chac, or other similar
instruments of music between the hour of 10 o’clock
in the evening of one day and the hour of 6 o’clock in
the morning of the next day in accordance with sec-
tion 63(a) of the Summary Offences Act, Chap. 11:02;
or
(b) beat any drum or play any noisy instrument in any Street
or Public Place in accordance with section 64 (2)(a) of the
Summary Offences Act, Chap. 11:02,
shall send such applications to the Second Division Officer in
charge of the Station District, where the occasion is to be held or
to any other Second Division Officer not below the rank of
Corporal to investigate.
3. It shall be the duty of the Second Division Officer investigat-
ing the application to—
(a) visit the address where the occasion is to be held in
order to determine its suitability;
(b) ensure that permission is granted from the com-
petent authority to use the location, if the activity is
to be held in a public place;
(c) interview persons within the immediate vicinity to
determine whether they have any objection to the
activities to be held;
(d) ensure that the occasion is not held for monetary
gain;
(e) ensure that the activity does not impede the free flow
of traffic;
Public Place
Application
for Licence
Duties of the
Second
Division
Officer
investigating
the applica-
tion
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 3
Playing/Beating of Drums and Control of Music S.O. No. 35



(f) determine whether there is a need for police
officers to preserve order or control traffic;
(g) ensure that the applicant is a bona fide person to
apply for the licence.
4. The Second Division Officer on completion of his investiga-
tion, shall submit his report together with his recommendations to
the Office in charge of the Division.
5. The Officer in charge of the Division, on receipt of the report
and recommendations of the Second Division Officer, if he is
satisfied that the investigation is complete, may issue the licence
stating the conditions under which the activity is to be held.
However, where he is not satisfied that a licence should be issued,
he shall inform the applicant in writing of his decision. A specimen
of the licence is attached at Appendix “A”.
Submission
of findings
Decision of
the Officer in
charge of the
Division
4 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 35 Playing/Beating of Drums and Control of Music



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 5
Playing/Beating of Drums and Control of Music S.O. No. 35