TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
STANDING  ORDERS  37
PROMOTION



Promotion
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
SECTION
1. Promotion
2. Eligibility to write Promotion Examination
3. Exemption
4. Publication of Promotion Examination
5. Submission of Applications
6. Responsibility of the Officer in charge of the Division
7. Examinations Notifications
8. Officer to Report to
9. Publication of Pass and Referral List
10. Officer qualified for Interview
11. Establishment of Promotion Advisory Board
12. Composition of the Promotion Advisory Board
13. Preparation of Merit List
14. Recommendations for Promotions
2 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 37 Promotion



1. “Promotion” refers to the elevation from one rank to another.
2. All Police Officers in the Second Division are eligible to write
the Police Promotion Examinations. In the case of a Constable, he
must have completed three (3) years service and have passed his
Probationer’s Examination.
3. (1) Police Officers in possession of a General Certificate of
Education in English Language, Grade “A”, “B” or “C”; or a
Caribbean Examination Council General Proficiency 1, 2, or 3,
shall apply to be exempted from the requirements of writing
any further qualifying examination in English Language for
promotion in the Service.
(2) When such exemptions are granted, it shall be published
in Departmental Orders for general information.
4. (1) Publication of the information regarding Promotion
Examination shall be made in Departmental Orders.
(2) The publication shall include:
(a) the date on which the examinations are to be held;
(b) syllabus of the subjects to be written;
(c) the deadline for payment of the examination fees at
the treasury or District Revenue Office;
(d) the deadline for submission of the applications.
5. (1) Police Officers desirous of writing the Promotion
Examination shall submit their applications through the Officer
in charge of the Division/Branch to which they are attached for
transmission to the Deputy Commissioner of Police.
(2) These applications shall include the following:
(a) the Centre at which the applicants are desirous of
writing the examination;
(b) the original receipt issued on payment of examina-
tion fees;
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 3
Promotion S.O. No. 37
Promotion
Eligibility to
write
Promotion
Examination
Exemption
Publication of
Promotion
Examination
Submission
of
Applications



(c) state whether exempted from English Language and
quote the Departmental Order;
In the case where no exemption has been
published, attach the original certificate and two (2)
copies.
(d) in the case of referral, state the subject to be
rewritten.
6. The Officer in charge of the Division/Branch, on receipt of
the applications from police officers under his command shall:
(a) prepare a nominal roll in accordance with the
specimen shown at Appendix “A”;
(b) submit the nominal roll together with the applica-
tions and receipts to the Deputy Commissioner of
Police.
7. (1) The Deputy Commissioner, on receipt of the nominal
rolls from each Division/Branch, shall submit them together with
the original receipts of examination fees to the Service
Commissions Department.
(2) The Service Commissions Department shall process the
information and prepare notification for each applicant.
(3) The notification shall include the number, rank and
name of the applicant, his examination number, the examination
centre and the subjects to be written.
(4) The notifications shall be submitted to the
Commissioner of Police for transmission to the applicants through
the Officer in charge of the Division/Branch to which they are
attached.
(5) The Officer in charge of the Division/Branch, on receipt
of the notifications shall cause them to be distributed to all
applicants in the Division/Branch.
8. Officers writing the Promotion Examination, shall report to
their Examination Centres on the respective dates and times with
their notification and Police Identification Card.
4 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 37 Promotion
Responsi-
bility of the
Officer in
charge of the
Division
Examina-
tions
Notifications
Officer to
Report to



9. A list showing the successful officers and those referred in
specific subjects, shall be published in the Departmental Orders
after each examination.
10. (1) Officers in charge of Divisions/Branches when making
recommendations for promotion, shall be guided by Regulation 20
of the Police Service Commission Regulations, Chap. 1:01.
(2) (a) He shall enter his evaluation of the officer on the
“Particulars of Candidate Form”. A specimen of this
form is shown at Appendix “B”.
(b) Care should be taken that his evaluation under the
caption “Qualities and Performance of Duties” and
his conclusion under the caption “Fitness for
Promotion” are consistent.
(3) An appraisal of the officer’s performance together with
his suitability for promotion to the next higher rank shall be
entered on his “Inset Sheet”.
(4) The completed “Particulars of Candidate Form” shall be
included in the relevant “Division Personal File” and submitted to
the “Promotion Advisory Board” through the Commissioner of
Police.
(5) In addition to the above, the Officer in charge of the
Division/Branch, shall prepare a “Priority List” showing officers
recommended for promotion in each rank in a descending order of
merit.
(6) The “Priority List” shall be submitted under separate
and confidential cover to the Commissioner of Police.
11.The Commissioner of Police shall consider and recommend
Police Officers to the Commission for promotion.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 5
Promotion S.O. No. 37
Publication of
Pass and
Referral List
Recommenda-
tions for
Promotions



12. (a) Police Officers who are eligible for promotion and have
been considered but not recommended shall be
informed in writing that they have been considered
but not recommended.
(b) The memorandum shall advise officers of the reason(s)
for the failure to recommend them and that they can
appeal to the Commission within 14 days of receipt of
the notification.
6 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 37 Promotion



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 7
Promotion S.O. No. 37



8 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 37 Promotion



APPENDIX  “A”
JUDGES RULES
AND
ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTIONS
TO THE POLICE
ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTIONS ON INTERROGATION
AND THE TAKING OF STATEMENTS
1. Procedure generally
2. Record of interrogation
3. Comfort and refreshment
4. Interrogation of children and young persons
5. Interrogation of foreigners
6. Authentication of statements of suspected or accused persons
7. Supply to accused persons of written statement of charges
8. Facilities for defence
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 9
Promotion S.O. No. 37