TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
STANDING  ORDERS  38
CHARGE ROOM



Charge  Room
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
SECTION
1. Charge Room
2. Charge Room Security
3. Compound Sentry
4. Second Division Officer-in-charge of the Charge Room
5. Charge Room Officers Order
6. Conduct of Police Officers on Duty in the Charge Room
7. Duties of the Second Division Officer-in-charge of the Charge Room
8. Duty of the Charge Room Sentry
9. Arrival of First Division Officer or Inspector
10. Forbidden Practices and Modes of Dress
11. Responsibility of the Officer in charge of the Division
12. Responsibility of the Compound Sentry
13. General
2 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 38 Charge Room



1. “Charge Room” refers to that area of a Police Station where
the movement of police officers are recorded, prisoners are
processed, books and records designated by the Commissioner of
Police are kept and members of the public make enquires and
reports are investigated.
2. “Charge Room Security” refers to a police officer detailed to
carry out duties in a Charge Room.
3. “Compound Sentry” refers to a police officer detailed to carry
out armed security patrol within the compound of a Police Station.
4. “Second Division Officer-in-charge of the Charge Room”
refers to the police officer who is responsible for supervision in the
Charge Room. He shall be the custody officer during his tour of
duty.
5. Police Officers on duty in the Charge Room shall be armed
and dressed in the following manner:
(a) By Day—Patrol Order No. 3.
(b) By Night—Patrol Order No. 4.
6. Police Officers on duty in the Charge Room shall— 
(a) be courteous to members of the public;
(b) interview persons and attend promptly to reports in
order of priority.
7. It shall be the duty of the Second Division Officer-in-charge
of the Charge Room to—
(a) verify and sign the handover;
(b) detail adequate number of sentries for Charge Room
and Compound Duties;
(c) ensure that reports are recorded in the Station Diary
and the relevant corresponding books and/or regis-
ters during his tour of duty on the said day the
reports were received;
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 3
Charge Room S.O. No. 38
Charge Room
Charge Room
Security
Compound
Sentry
Second
Division
Officer-in-
charge of the
Charge Room
Charge Room
Officers
Order
Conduct of
Police
Officers on
Duty in the
Charge Room
Duties of the
Second
Division
Officer-in-
charge of the
Charge Room



(d) enquire into the bona fide of an arrest whenever
a person is detained without a warrant. If he
considers the arrest unlawful or the evidence does
not justify the charge, he shall not accept the
prisoner but—
(i) allow the person to leave;
(ii) record the action taken in the Station
Diary;
(iii) inform the First Division Officer-in-charge
of the area of the action he took as soon as
possible.
(e) supervise the processing of the prisoner and ensure
that the correct charge is laid;
(f) ensure that the arrested person is informed of—
(i) his rights to retain and instruct without
delay a legal adviser of his own choice;
(ii) his rights to hold communication with his
legal adviser;
(iii) his entitlement to a telephone call to his
legal adviser, family or friend;
(iv) the person in custody is treated in accor-
dance with the requirements of Part II of
S.O. 32.
(g) ensure that entries with respect to the actions
taken at paragraph 7 (f) are recorded in the Station
Diary;
(h) ensure that all the duties assigned to the
Charge Room and Compound Sentries are effectively
carried out;
(i) issue of arms and ammunition and their retrieval;
(j) detail police officers to investigate reports;
(k) submit immediately to the Officer in charge of the
Division, an extract of any report made by a member
of the public against police officers;
(l) ensure the preparation and submission of
morning reports;
4 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 38 Charge Room



(m) ensure that when a report is made which concerns
another police district, the Charge Room Sentry—
(i) records the report in the Station Diary;
(ii) takes prompt action where necessary;
(iii) advises the informant of the station under
whose jurisdiction the report falls, that the
report will be transmitted to the station
concerned and that any further informa-
tion or communication should be made to
that station;
(iv) transmits a message stating the facts
recorded and action taken, if any, to the
Second Division Officer-in-charge of the
station concerned.
(n) ensure that the telephones are kept locked when not
in use;
(o) keep the telephone keys in his possession, and
supervise the recording of all toll;
(p) ensure that all breaches of discipline are promptly
dealt with in accordance with the Police Service
Commission Regulations;
(q) keep in his “personal possession” the keys to the
facilities where firearms and ammunition are
stored;
(r) perform all other duties consistent with his role
as the supervisor of the Charge Room and carry
out any other duties as may be assigned to him
from time to time.
8. Police Officers detailed for duty as Charge Room Sentry
shall perform the following functions:
(a) interview persons and record reports;
(b) record the movements of persons, including police
officers in and out of the station;
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 5
Charge Room S.O. No. 38
Duty of the
Charge Room
Sentry



(c) answer the telephone in accordance with
instructions as set out in Standing Order 39;
(d) record the telephone messages and wireless
communications inclusive of telephone tolls in the
register;
(e) send telephone messages and transmit wireless
communications;
(f) keep the wireless communications on at all times;
(g) inform the Second Division Officer-in-charge
of the Charge Room of all serious reports and
occurrences;
(h) classify the reports and record them in the relevant
registers;
(i) assist in the processing of prisoners, e.g., searching
and fingerprinting;
(j) visit cells once every hour or as directed and record
such visit immediately thereafter in the Station
Diary;
(k) process applications for Certificates of Character;
(l) hoist and lower flags at Station;
(m) report any breaches of discipline to his immediate
senior in rank;
(n) perform any other duties as may be assigned to him
from time to time.
9. Whenever a First Division Officer or an Inspector arrives at
a Station—
(a) The first police officer recognising him shall call the
Charge Room to attention.
6 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 38 Charge Room
Arrival of
First Division
Officer or
Inspector



(b) The senior officer present shall—
(i) pay compliments, where applicable, and
report the state of the Station and District;
(ii) present the Station Registers for inspection
and initialling in a descending order—
(1) Serious Crime Register
(2) Minor Crime Register
(3) Minor Offence Register
(4) Traffic Offence Register
(5) Telephone Message Book
(6) Patrol Register
(7) Station Diary
(8) Domestic Violence Regulations
(9) Persons in custody
(10) Any other Register requested by him.
10. The following practices and modes of dress by Police officers
are forbidden in the Charge Room of a Police Station:
(a) Smoking;
(b) Drinking and Eating;
(c) Sitting on tables or desks;
(d) Bareback;
(e) Barefooted;
(f) Sleeveless Vests;
(g) Bath Trunks;
(h) In Physical Training or Football short pants;
(i) Any activity inconsistent with S.O. 6  (Attire and
Appearance).
(j) In the case of Male Officers—Earrings, nose rings, etc.
11. It shall be the responsibility of the Officer in charge of the
Division to ensure that there is posted in a conspicuous place in the
Charge Room of all Police Stations/Posts/Division the following:
(a) Mission Statement of Trinidad and Tobago Police Service;
(b) Code of Conduct of Trinidad and Tobago Police Service;
(c) Notices informing prisoners of their rights;
(d) A framed map of the Station District;
(e) Framed pictures of the President, Prime Minister
and Commissioner of Police;
(f) Coat of Arms of Trinidad and Tobago.
Forbidden
Practices and
Modes of
Dress
Responsibility
of the Officer
in charge of
the Division
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 7
Charge Room S.O. No. 38



12. A Compound Sentry is required to—
(a) keep out intruders;
(b) repel external attacks;
(c) alert personnel in the Police Station of any
impending danger.
13. (1) Police Officers are reminded that a Charge Room is the
show piece of a Police Station/Post and their conduct therein will
reflect on the image of the Police Service.
(2) Persons coming to make reports at a Police Station
are usually distressed or traumatised and need the sympathetic
understanding of the officers to whom they are complaining.
(3) Police Officers, therefore, should be sensitised to this
situation and should refrain from becoming hostile or indifferent
to their clients whenever their assistance is sought.
8 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 38 Charge Room
Responsibility
of the
Compound
Sentry
General



Appendix  A to come in here
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 9
Charge Room S.O. No. 38



Appendix  B  to come in here
10 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 38 Charge Room