TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
STANDING ORDERS  30
SCIENTIFIC AGENCIES FOR CRIME DETECTION



Scientific Agencies for Crime Detection
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
SECTION
1. Scientific Agencies
2. Internal Agencies
3. Police Officers Authorised to take Fingerprints, etc.
4. Person Authorised to sign Certificate of Character
5. Destruction of Fingerprints, etc.
6. External Agencies
PART  I
F
INGERPRINT BUREAU
7. Fingerprint Bureau
8. Fingerprints
9. Fingerprint Experts
10. Purpose for taking Finger Prints
11. Procedure for taking Fingerprints correctly
12. Duties of Arresting Officer
13. Duties of Fingerprint Expert
14. Fingerprint Impressions found on scene of crime
15. Submission of Results of Completed Cases
16. Certificate of Character
17. Certificate of Character Register
18. Forms of Identification Required
19. Application and Payment of Prescribed Fee
20. Foreign Applications
21. Certificate of Character for Estate Police
22. Duties of Second Division Officer-in-charge of the Charge Room
23. Duties of the Second Division Officer-in-charge of the Station
24. Duties of the Officer in charge Fingerprint Bureau
25. Destruction of Elimination Fingerprint Slips
PART  II
P
HOTOGRAPHIC SECTION
26. Photographic Section
27. Decentralised Units
2 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 30 Scientific Agencies for Crime Detection



28. Administrative Control 
29. Photographers
30. Registers to be Kept
31. Duties of Photographers
32. Duties of Officer in charge
33. Destruction of Photographs
34. General
PART III
M
ODUS OPERANDI AND RECORDS BUREAU
35. Modus Operandi and Records Bureau
36. Duties of the Officer in charge
PART IV
E
XTERNAL AGENCIES
37. Forensic Science Centre 
38. Request for Assistance
39. Submission of Application
40. Retrieval of Exhibits
41. Request for District Medical Officer, Factory Inspectorate, Licensing
Authority, etc.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 3
Scientific Agencies for Crime Detection S.O. No. 30



1. Scientific Agencies for Crime Detection used by the Police
Service are either internal or external—
(a) the internal agencies are those which emanate from
within the Police Service; and
(b) the external agencies are those which are outside of
the Police Service but which lend support and are
critical in the detection of crime.
2. (1) The agencies within the Police Service for the collecting,
collating, analysing, recording crimes, providing data and for
other purposes are—
(a) Fingerprint Bureau;
(b) Photographic Section; and
(c) Modus Operandi and Records Bureau.
(2) These agencies together form the Criminal Records
Office.
3. The Commissioner of Police has authorised members of the
Trinidad and Tobago Police Service to take and record for the
purpose of identification, the measurements, photographs and
fingerprint impressions of all persons in lawful custody in
accordance with section 37 of the Police Service Act, Chap. 5:01.
4. The Commissioner of Police has authorised the Senior
Superintendent Criminal Investigations Department and
Criminal Records Office to sign the Certificate of Character in the
column provided for his signature or to arrange for a First
Division Officer so to do.
5. The Fingerprint impressions, measurements and photo-
graphs of an arrested person who has been discharged or
acquitted and had no previous conviction shall be forthwith
destroyed to the satisfaction of the acquitted person or handed
over to him. The relevant records shall be updated to this effect.
6. The external agencies commonly used by Police Officers
are—
(a) Forensic Science Centre;
Scientific
Agencies
Internal
Agencies
Police
Officers
Authorised to
take
Fingerprints,
etc.
Person
Authorised to
sign
Certificate of
Character
Destruction
of
Fingerprints,
etc.
External
Agencies
4 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 30 Scientific Agencies for Crime Detection



(b) District Medical Officer;
(c) Licensing Authority; and
(d) Factory Inspectorate.
PART  I
FINGERPRINT BUREAU
7. “Fingerprint Bureau” is a department, within the Police
Service which has the responsibility for “Scientific Crime
Detection” by fingerprint, along with the compiling, tracing,
posting, storage and retrieval of criminal records.
8. “Fingerprints” are impressions of the ridge details of  under-
side of the fingers and palms by which an individual can be
identified.
9. “Fingerprint Experts” refer to police officers who are
attached to the Fingerprint Bureau and are trained in the science
of identifying individuals by fingerprint impressions.
10. Police Officers are authorised to take fingerprint impres-
sions in the following cases:
(a) identification of person in lawful custody;
(b) applicants for Certificate of Character;
(c) unidentified dead bodies; and
(d) for elimination purposes to distinguish between the
owner of a stolen property and the suspect. 
11. Police Officers taking fingerprints shall comply with the
instructions following:
(a) ensure the name and address entered on the form
are correctly spelt and ascertain the identity of the
person to be fingerprinted;
(b) deal with one person at a time;
(c) use black printer’s ink or prescribed fingerprint ink;
(d) use the prescribed form;
Fingerprint
Bureau
Fingerprints
Fingerprint
Experts
Purpose for
taking
Fingerprints
Procedure for
taking
Fingerprints
correctly
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 5
Scientific Agencies for Crime Detection S.O. No. 30



(e) clean inking slab if dirty;
(f) distribute ink evenly on inking slab by rolling with
fingerprint roller;
(g) wash and dry fingers thoroughly;
(h) in cases where persons perspire profusely, it is
advisable that the officer taking the prints, dries,
inks and prints each finger one at a time;
(i) the officer taking the prints must be in control at all
times;
(j) roll fingers from the end of the nail on one side to the
end of the nail on the other side. The inking of the
finger must go a little beyond the nail joint;
(k) be sure that the impressions are recorded in the cor-
rect order as per fingerprint slip;
(l) use even pressure when taking the fingerprints;
(m) if amputation or deformity makes it impossible to
obtain perfect impressions, submit the best that can
be obtained with a memo stapled on, explaining the
circumstances and also a note made on the particu-
lar space(s) allotted for the fingers;
(n) both the officer taking the prints and the person
being fingerprinted must sign the completed form;
(o) the fingerprint form is to be completed with all
descriptions and the purpose for fingerprinting;
(p) no erasures, overwriting, obliterations or liquid
paper are to be used on the fingerprint form or cer-
tificate; 
(q) the column marked “Commissioner of Police” on the
certificate shall not be signed by any officer other
than a First Division Officer designated by the
Senior Superintendent Criminal Investigation
Department/Criminal Records Office; and
6 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 30 Scientific Agencies for Crime Detection



(r) the completed form is to be submitted immediately to the
Fingerprint Bureau only through the official form of
despatch and accompanied by the register.
12. It shall be the duty of an Arresting Officer/Complainant to
do the following:
(a) take the fingerprint impressions of the arrested
person on the prescribed form as at Appendices “A”
(Fingerprint Form) and “B” (Palm Print Form).  
(b) submit the Fingerprint Slips with the impressions
within forty-eight (48) hours as follows:
(i) in the case of an officer in Western, Port-of-
Spain and North-Eastern Division, to the
Fingerprint Bureau; and
(ii) in the case of an officer in any Division
other than those mentioned at paragraph (i)
above, to the senior fingerprint expert
attached to his Division.
(c) at the expiration of seven (7) days after the submis-
sion of the Fingerprint Slips, the complainant shall
proceed to the place of submission with the relevant
case file for the purpose of obtaining the results of
the tracing of the fingerprints submitted.
13. (1) The Fingerprint Expert attached to a Division or the Officer in
charge of the Fingerprint Bureau on receipt of the Fingerprint Slips and
other relevant documents shall—
(a) trace the prints; and
(b) have the results of the tracing ready for delivery
within seven (7) days of receipt.
(2) Notwithstanding the instructions above, the Officer in
charge of the Fingerprint Bureau may trace and deliver results at
the earliest opportunity if they are urgently required for
production in Court.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 7
Scientific Agencies for Crime Detection S.O. No. 30
Duties of
Arresting
Officer
Duties of
Fingerprint
Expert



14. (1) The Fingerprint Expert visiting the scene of a crime
shall comply with the instructions given at Standing Order 29,
Part V, paragraph 14. However, when an identifiable finge
print is found at the scene of a crime, a record of it will be
placed on the Scene of Crime Fingerprint Section, and the
Officer in charge of Fingerprint Bureau will notify the Officer in
charge of the Division/Branch where the crime was committed
on a printed memorandum form as set out at Appendix “D”.
If no identifiable prints are found on the scene, the Fingerprint
expert concerned will so inform the Officer in charge of the
Division.
(2) Where—
(a) an arrest is made in the case on the information
supplied or on other evidence; or
(b) a person subsequently charged with another offence
is suspected of having committed the former offence,
the Officer in charge of the Division/Branch
concerned will notify the Officer in charge of the
Fingerprint Bureau by submitting the Fingerprint
slip of the accused and other documents attached to
the form.
15. (1) It shall be the duty of the Court Prosecutor to
submit the results of all cases determined in court to the
Officer in charge of the Fingerprint Bureau in the follow-
ing manner:
(a) a daily return on the Result Slip which is attached
to the Case Files or Dockets; See Appendix “E1”.
(2) However, Court Prosecutors in Divisions outside of
Port-of-Spain, North Eastern and Western Divisions shall submit
the returns mentioned, to the Fingerprint Bureau through the
Fingerprint Expert attached to their respective Divisions.
Fingerprint
Impressions
found on
scene of
crime
Submission
of Results of
Completed
Cases
8 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 30 Scientific Agencies for Crime Detection



16. Certificate of Character is a document issued by the
Commissioner of Police to an applicant, indicating whether or not
such person has a criminal record.
17. The Second Division Officer-in-charge of a Station, shall
keep an official record known as a Certificate of Character
Register, in which shall be entered information regarding the
application for a Certificate of Character, its movements and
delivery to the applicant/receiver. The manner in which the
Register is to be drawn up is shown hereunder—
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Name Address Certificate Date Prints
No. taken
(5) (6) (7) (8)
Date Prints Date Date of Signature
Sent for Certificate Delivery of
Tracing Returned Receiver
18. (1) Members of the service are to ensure that applicants
requesting Certificate of Character, produce any one of the follow-
ing forms of identification:
(a) Trinidad and Tobago Identification Card; or
(b) Passport.
(2) In instances where the applicant is not in possession of
the documents mentioned at paragraphs (a) and (b), a letter
issued by the Elections and Boundaries Commission can be pro-
duced. A recent photograph of the applicant, bearing the stamp of
the Elections and Boundaries Commission must be attached to
this letter.
19. (1) Applicants desiring Certificates of Character may apply
to any district Police Station whether they reside within the said
district or not.
Certificate of
Character
Certificate of
Character
Register
Forms of
Identification
Required
Application
and Payment
of Prescribed
Fee
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 9
Scientific Agencies for Crime Detection S.O. No. 30



(2) Fingerprint impressions of applicants requesting
Certificates of Character, shall be taken only on payment of the
prescribed fee.
20. (1) Foreign applications for Certificates of Character are
divided into two categories— 
(a) fingerprint impressions received from a foreign
source; and
(b) fingerprint impressions to be sent abroad.
(2) Procedure to be adopted—
(a) police officers at any Police Station receiving finger-
print impressions from a foreign source, shall, on
payment of the prescribed fee, prepare and attach
the certificate to the Fingerprint form and forward
same to the Fingerprint Bureau for tracing; and
(b) in the case, where members of the public request
that the fingerprint impressions be taken for the
purpose of sending them abroad for processing,
police officers shall comply with the instructions
hereunder—
(i) the applicant must produce a letter from
the foreign Embassy/Consulate requesting
the information;
(ii) the forms of identification to be accepted are
set out in paragraph 18;
(iii) the fingerprints are to be taken on the
Elimination Form and handed over to the
applicant for transmission to the country
destined;
(iv) no prescribed fee is to be taken or certifi-
cate made out;
(v) all pertinent information shall be written
on the form including the necessary
signatures;
Foreign
Applications
10 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 30 Scientific Agencies for Crime Detection



(vi) the official Station Stamp shall be placed
on the top left hand corner of the
Fingerprint Elimination Form.
21. Police Officers taking fingerprint impressions for
Certificate(s) of Character with respect to Estate Police applicants
shall adopt the following procedure:
(a) the applicant must produce the form of identification
as mentioned at paragraph 18;
(b) the fingerprints of the applicant must be recorded on
the Fingerprint Forms which are currently being
used for prisoners;
(c) the name of the Security Firm must be legibly
written at the top (front) of the form in red ink;
(d) all other information and most importantly, the
detailed address of the applicant must be clearly
stated;
(e) the form must be signed by the applicant and the
officer taking the fingerprints;
(f) prepare the Certificate(s) of Character Form and
receipt after payment of the prescribed fee;
(g) attach the certificates to the completed form;
(h) the completed form and certificate(s) will immedi-
ately be forwarded to the Criminal Records office for
processing.
22. It shall be the duty of the Second Division Officer-in-charge
of the Charge Room to certify the Fingerprint Elimination Form
in the column provided after verifying—
(a) the information recorded on the Fingerprint
Elimination Form;
(b) that the form of identification presented bears a true
likeness of the applicant; and
(c) that the certificate attached to the Elimination Form
is properly prepared and nothing is written in the
Certificate of
Character for
Estate Police
Duties of
Second
Division
Officer-in-
charge of the
Charge Room
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 11
Scientific Agencies for Crime Detection S.O. No. 30



column provided for the signature of the
Commissioner. However, he is to ensure that the
Police Officer taking the fingerprints signs the
receipt portion of the document.
23. It shall be the duty of the Second Division Officer-in-charge
of the Station to—
(a) submit the fingerprint impressions, to which is
attached the certificate, to the Fingerprint Bureau
within forty-eight (48) hours of the prints being
taken;
(b) ensure that the Certificate of Character is delivered
only to the person producing the Certificate of
Character Receipt;
(c) ensure that the Certificate of Character Register is
signed by the receiver of the Certificate of Character.
24. It shall be the duty of the Officer in charge Fingerprint
Bureau on receipt of the fingerprints and other relevant
documents to—
(a) have the prints traced and ready for delivery within
one (1) month;
(b) record on the back of the Certificate of Character, the
criminal record of the applicant, if any; and
(c) submit the Certificate of Character to the Senior
Superintendent Criminal Investigations Depart-
ment and Criminal Records Office for signature.
25. The Officer in charge of Fingerprint Bureau shall ensure
that the Elimination Fingerprint Slips are destroyed seven days
after they have been traced and the Certificate of Character
issued.
PART  II
P
HOTOGRAPHIC SECTION
26. Photographic Section is that Section in the Service where
records are produced on film to assist in the investigation of crime
and for any other purpose as directed by the Commissioner of
Police.
12 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 30 Scientific Agencies for Crime Detection
Duties of the
Second
Division
Officer-in-
charge of the
Station
Duties of the
Officer in
charge
Fingerprint
Bureau
Destruction
of
Elimination
Fingerprint
Slips
Photographic
Section



27. Within the Photographic Section there are decentralised
units called Photographic Laboratories located in Divisions.
28. (1) The personnel of the Photographic Laboratory in Port-
of-Spain will be under the command of the Senior Superintendent
Criminal Investigations Department/Criminal Records Office, but
those members of laboratories attached to Divisions will be under
the command of the Officer in charge of the Division to  which
they are attached for administrative purposes. The Senior
Superintendent Criminal Investigations Department/Criminal
Records Office maintains responsibility for other functions such
as equipment and materials. 
(2) The personnel of the Photographic Laboratory in Port-
of-Spain will perform such police duties as may be directed by the
Senior Superintendent Criminal Investigations Depart-
ment/Criminal Records Office.
29. Photographers are trained police officers responsible for
recording on film, scenes of crime, persons or incidents in order to
produce a photograph.
30. The Officer in charge of Photographic Section, shall ensure
that the following registers are kept and maintained at all photo-
graphic laboratories:
(a) Request Register—This is for recording all
official requests made to the laboratory for a
photographer;
(b) Scene of Crime—In this will be recorded all scenes
or exhibits photographed;
(c) Prisoner’s Photographic Register—This register
shall be indexed and shall record therein details of
the  photographed prisoner. See Appendix “I”;
(d) Fingerprint Exhibit—Record all fingerprint
exhibits received; 
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 13
Scientific Agencies for Crime Detection S.O. No. 30
Decentralised
Units
Administra-
tive Control 
Photographers
Registers to be
kept



(e) Convicted Persons Register—This register shall be
kept in Port-of-Spain only and used as a centralised
register with an index for recording the details and
Criminal Record Number of convicted persons whose
photographs have been taken throughout the
country;
(f) Inventory Register—Record all equipment received
or removed. At the end of each year the equipment on
hand shall be brought forward to the succeeding year.
31. Police Photographers are responsible for—
(a) photographing:
(i) the scenes of the crime;
(ii) fingerprints;
(iii) persons in lawful custody;
(iv) riots and demonstrations specifically to
determine infractions of the law;
(v) members of the Police Service and
civilian employees for administrative
requirements;
(vi) members of other Government Depart-
ments when requested;
(vii) social and other functions where police
officers are involved; and
(viii) any place or anything material to the
investigation of any crime, offence or inci-
dent as directed by the Officer in charge
of Division/Branch/Section.
(b) processing of the films;
(c) filing of prints and negatives;
(d) entering on the outside of the envelope the following:
(i) the particulars of the crime, offence or
incident and the address of the place
concerned;
(ii) the rank, number and name of the person
in charge at the scene or elsewhere,
investigating;
14 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 30 Scientific Agencies for Crime Detection
Duties of
Photogra-
phers



(iii) the date and time taken;
(iv) the rank, number and name of the
person who took the photographs;
(e) attaching on the outside of the envelope, in the case
where a prisoner has been photographed, a copy of
his photograph;
(f) in the case of photographers attached to laboratories
outside of Port-of-Spain, they are to submit to the
Officer in charge of the Photographic Section, a
monthly return indicating the details and Criminal
Record Number of convicted persons whose
photographs had been previously taken including
photographs of each convicted person;
(g) giving evidence before the Courts on matters of a
photographic nature when required and preparing
the certificate required by Act 28 of 1996;
(h) securing equipment/tools/material against loss or
negligent destruction;
(i) submitting a report on any equipment, films or neg-
atives that are damaged, spoilt or misplaced to the
Officer in charge of the Photographic Section within
forty-eight (48) hours of such incident.
32. The Officer in charge of the Photographic Section shall be
responsible for the following:
(a) general supervision of the Section;
(b) proper recording, storage and use of photographic
material supplied to the laboratories;
(c) in the case of Port-of-Spain Laboratory to ascertain
from Fingerprint Bureau, the details and Criminal
Record Number of convicted persons whose photo-
graphs had been previously taken;
(d) updating the Convicted Person’s Register with
the information from the Fingerprint Bureau and
the information obtained from all photographic
laboratories submitted to them monthly;
Duties of
Officer in
charge
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 15
Scientific Agencies for Crime Detection S.O. No. 30



(e) circulating the photographs of convicted persons on a
monthly basis to all Divisions for inclusion in their
“Rogues Gallery”;
(f) (i) carrying out inspection from time to time of  the
laboratories in Port-of-Spain and other
Divisions;
(ii) submitting a report to the Officer in charge of
the Criminal Investigations Department and
Criminal Records Office of his findings and
recommendations within seven (7) days after
such inspection;
(g) submitting to the Officer in charge of the Criminal
Investigations Department/Criminal Records Office,
an Annual Return of unserviceable equipment and
materials to be purchased.
33. Photographs of persons who have been discharged or
acquitted by a Court and not previously convicted, shall be
destroyed in accordance with section 37(i) of the Police Service
Act, Chap. 15:01.
34. No equipment, material or registers shall be removed from
any photographic laboratory without the authority of the Officer
in charge of the Criminal Investigations Department and
Criminal Records Office.
PART  III
M
ODUS OPERANDI AND RECORDS BUREAU
35. Modus Operandi and Records Bureau is a Section of the
Service which collates information regarding serious incidents,
crimes and criminals, their activities and trends of operation for
the purpose of analysing, disseminating and storage of such data.
36. The Officer in charge of the Modus Operandi and Records
Bureau, on receipt of the monthly and annual statistical returns
on crimes, shall be responsible for the following:
(a) collating the returns;
Destruction
of
Photographs
General
Modus
Operandi and
Records
Bureau
Duties of the
Officer in
charge
16 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 30 Scientific Agencies for Crime Detection



(b) analysing the information supplied in the returns;
(c) preparing the statistical data on a national basis;
(d) disseminating the data internally or externally on
the advice of the Commissioner of Police;
(e) storage of data to be used as a reference;
(f) supplying information to members of the Service
investigating crime and other approved functions,
e.g., Lectures;
(g) liaise with the Officer in charge of Fingerprint
Bureau, Photographic Section, Criminal Intelligence
Unit or the Officer in charge of any other
Division/Branch towards gathering or disseminating
information on criminal activities;
(h) reviewing and updating methods of gathering
criminal statistics and classification of crimes;
(i) ensuring that the Officers in charge of Divisions/
Branches are informed of any improved system relating
to crime which is to be introduced into the Service.
PART  IV
E
XTERNAL AGENCIES
37. The Trinidad and Tobago Forensic Science Centre is an
independent Department whose services and facilities are utilised
in the scientific support of the investigation of crime and provides
expert testimony in courts of law.
38. Police Officers making a request for assistance from the
Forensic Science Centre in the investigation of crimes or serious
reports shall do so in the following manner:
(a) by telephone communication through the Officer in
charge of the Division when a Scientific Officer is
required to visit a scene;
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 17
Scientific Agencies for Crime Detection S.O. No. 30
Forensic
Science
Centre
Request for
Assistance



(b) by submission of a written application to the
Forensic Science Centre on the prescribed form
shown at Appendix “G” when an exhibit is to be sub-
mitted for analysis.
39. Police Officers submitting written applications to the
Forensic Science Centre shall do the following:
(a) prepare the forms in duplicate;
(b) cbtain a signature from a police officer not below the
rank of Inspector, after completion;
(c) take the forms and exhibits in person to the Centre.
40. Retrieval of exhibits and receipt of the “Certificate of
Analysis” from the Scientific Officer shall be done in person by the
officer who submitted same.
41. (1) Where in an investigation, it has become necessary to
request the services of the District Medical Officer, Factory
Inspectorate, Licensing Authority, etc., request for their services
can be made by telephone through the Second Division Officer-in-
charge of the Station. However, when requesting a certified copy
of a motor vehicle from the Licensing Authority, such request
must be made on the prescribed form as shown at Appendix “H”.
(2) Hereunder is a list of circumstances under which a
request can be made for the services of these departments—
(a) District Medical Officer—Sudden death, suicide,
drowning, suspected murders, fatal accidents,
sexual offences, etc.
(b) Factory Inspectorate—Industrial fires, in cases
where explosive substances are used, etc.
(c) Licensing Authority—Fatal accidents, serious
accidents, inspection of unserviceable vehicles,
obtaining certified copies of registered owners, issue
of Driving Permit, etc.
18 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 30 Scientific Agencies for Crime Detection
Submission
of Application
Retrieval of
Exhibits
Request for
District
Medical
Officer,
Factory
Inspectorate,
Licensing
Authority,
etc.



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 19
Scientific Agencies for Crime Detection S.O. No. 30



20 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 30 Scientific Agencies for Crime Detection



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 21
Scientific Agencies for Crime Detection S.O. No. 30



22 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 30 Scientific Agencies for Crime Detection



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 23
Scientific Agencies for Crime Detection S.O. No. 30



24 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 30 Scientific Agencies for Crime Detection



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 25
Scientific Agencies for Crime Detection S.O. No. 30



26 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 30 Scientific Agencies for Crime Detection



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 27
Scientific Agencies for Crime Detection S.O. No. 30



28 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 30 Scientific Agencies for Crime Detection



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 29
Scientific Agencies for Crime Detection S.O. No. 30



30 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 30 Scientific Agencies for Crime Detection



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 31
Scientific Agencies for Crime Detection S.O. No. 30



32 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 30 Scientific Agencies for Crime Detection



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 33
Scientific Agencies for Crime Detection S.O. No. 30



34 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 30 Scientific Agencies for Crime Detection