TRINIDAD AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
STANDING  ORDERS  31
MISCELLANEOUS REPORTS



Miscellaneous  Reports
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
SECTION
1. Miscellaneous Reports
2. Occurrences 
3. Other Matters
4. Occurrence Register
5. Duty of the Investigator
6. Duty of the Officer in charge of the Division
7. Closing of an Occurrence
8. Procedure when dealing with other matters
APPENDIX  “A”
J
UDGES RULES
AND
ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTIONS
TO THE POLICE
ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTIONS ON INTERROGATION
AND THE TAKING OF STATEMENTS
1. Procedure generally
2. Record of interrogation
3. Comfort and refreshment
4. Interrogation of children and young persons
5. Interrogation of foreigners
6. Authentication of statements of suspected or accused persons
7. Supply to accused persons of written statement of charges
8. Facilities for defence
2 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 31 Miscellaneous Reports



1. (1) “Miscellaneous Reports” are those reports which
initially do not disclose a criminal offence.
(2) These reports are categorised as follows:
(a) Occurrences;
(b) Other Matters.
2. (1) “Occurrences” are reports of a serious nature which
include the following:
(a) Suicides;
(b) Unnatural Deaths;
(c) Fatal Accidents;
(d) Natural disasters, e.g., earthquake, flood, hurricane;
(e) Fires;
(f) Disasters involving ships, aircraft, etc.
(2) All occurrences when reported shall be thoroughly inves-
tigated in the same manner as that of a crime.
3. “Other Matters” are reports of a less serious nature which
may or may not require police action to resolve them.
These include the following:
(a) Threats;
(b) Disputes;
(c) Annoyances.
4. It shall be the duty of the Second Division Officer-in-charge
of a Police Station, to keep and maintain an Occurrence Register
as shown at Appendix “A”.
5. It shall be the duty of a Police Officer who investigates an
occurrence to do the following:
(a) enter in the Occurrence Register all facts and action
taken in relation to the investigation;
(b) in the case where death has resulted a statement
from a relative or a friend of the deceased shall
include the following information of the deceased:
Miscellane-
ous Reports
Occurrences 
Other
Matters
Occurrence
Register
Duty of the
Investigator
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 3
Miscellaneous Reports S.O. No. 31



(i) name, aliases and last known address; 
(ii) age and ethnicity; 
(iii) place of birth;
(iv) marital status; 
(v) religion; 
(vi) occupation/profession; 
(vii) children (sex and age); 
(viii) place and mode of disposal;
(c) submit the file with original statements and docu-
ments to the Officer in charge of the Division within
six (6) weeks after the occurrence was reported;
(d) enter in the register the date and to whom the file
was submitted;
(e) enter the final decision of the First Division Officer
perusing the file;
(f) in the case where an inquest has been instituted, he
shall enter in the Register—
(i) the date of hearing;
(ii) any postponement;
(iii) the Coroner’s decision (in red ink);
(iv) in addition, if the Coroner’s verdict
discloses a crime, he shall enter the crime
in the relevant register and cross reference
it with the Occurrence Register.
6. (1) The First Division officer, on receipt of the file from the
Second Division Officer-in-charge of the Station, if after perusal,
he is satisfied that there is no criminal liability, recklessness or
foul play, he shall return the file to the Second Division Officer-in-
charge of the Station with instructions to “mark off” the
occurrence.
(2) However, in the case of unnatural death where it is
necessary to have an inquest conducted, he shall cause three (3)
copies of the file to be made. Statements are to be typewritten and
original documents photocopied.
Duty of
Officer-in-
charge of the
Division
4 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 31 Miscellaneous Reports



(3) The three (3) copies of the file are to be dealt with as
follows:
(a) submit one (1) copy to the Clerk of the Peace in the
Court where the inquest is to be held;
(b) one (1) copy to be filed at the Divisional Office;
(c) submit one (1) copy to the Officer in charge of Court
and Process Branch, in the case of Port-of-Spain,
Western and North Eastern Divisions and in other
Divisions, to the Court Prosecutor of the Court where
the inquest is to be held.
(4) The original file with the relevant documents is to be
returned to the Second Division Officer-in-charge of the Station
for:
(a) insertion of the officer’s instruction in the Occurrence
Register;
(b) delivering to the Investigator to facilitate the presen-
tation of the matter before the Coroner’s Court.
7. The First Division Officer or Inspector visiting or inspecting
a Station, shall mark off an occurrence by drawing a red diagonal
line across the page from the top right to the bottom left corner
and affix his initial, date and the word “closed” on the red line.
8. It shall be the duty of a Police Officer when dealing with a
report which is considered to fall within the category of “Other
Matters” to do the following:
(a) record the facts pertaining to the report in the
Station Diary;
(b) classify the facts based on the nature of the report,
e.g., “annoyance”. In addition, place beneath it in red
ink, the letters “O.M.” followed by the monthly serial
number of that category of reports for the month;
(c) advise parties concerned against the use of violence
and to seek legal advice;
(d) warn or cause to be warned, persons involved and
refer them to the Justice of the Peace;
Closing of an
Occurrence
Procedure
when dealing
with other
matters
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 5
Miscellaneous Reports S.O. No. 31



(e) record in the Station Diary and where applicable in
his Pocket Diary any advice or instructions given to
parties involved;
(f) treat all reports as confidential, notwithstanding the
fact that it does not disclose a crime or an offence.
APPENDIX  “B”
J
UDGES RULES AND
ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTIONS TO THE POLICE
These Rules do not affect the principles—
(a) that citizens have a duty to help a police officer to
discover and apprehend offenders;
(b) that police officers otherwise than by arrest, cannot
compel any person against his will to come to or
remain in any police station;
(c) that every person at any stage of an investigation
should be able to communicate and to consult
privately with an Attorney-at-law. This is so even if
he is in custody provided that in such a case no
unreasonable delay or hindrance is caused to the
processes of investigation or the administration of
justice by his doing so;
(d) That when a police officer who is making enquiries of
any person about an offence has enough evidence to
prefer a charge against that person for the offence, he
should without delay cause that person to be charged
or informed that he may be prosecuted for the
offence;
(e) that it is a fundamental condition of the
admissibility in evidence against any person, equally
of any oral answer given by that person to a question
put by a police officer and of any statement made by
that person, that it shall have been voluntary, in the
sense that it has not been obtained from him by fear
of prejudice or hope of advantage exercised or held
6 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 31 Miscellaneous Reports



out by a person in authority, or by oppression.
The principle set out in paragraph (e) above is overriding and
applicable in all cases. Within that principle the following Rules
are put forward as a guide to police officers conducting investiga-
tions. Non-conformity with these Rules may render answers and
statements liable to be excluded from evidence in subsequent
criminal proceedings:
I. When a police officer is trying to discover whether
or by whom, an offence has been committed he is
entitled to question any person, whether “suspected
or not”, from whom he thinks that useful informa-
tion may be obtained. Subject to Rule II hereunder,
he is so entitled whether or not the person in ques-
tion has been taken into custody so long as he has
not been charged with the offence or informed that
he may be prosecuted for it.
II. As soon as a police officer has evidence which would
afford reasonable grounds for suspecting that a per-
son has committed an offence, he shall caution that
person or cause him to be cautioned before putting
to him any questions or further questions, relating
to that offence.
The caution shall be in the following terms:
“You are not obliged to say anything unless you wish
to do so but what you say may be put into writing
and given in evidence.”
When after being cautioned a person is being ques-
tioned, or elects to make a statement, a record shall
be kept of the time and place at which any such
questioning or statement begin and ended and of the
persons present.
III. (a) Where a person is charged with or informed
that he may be prosecuted for an offence he
shall be cautioned in the following terms:
“ Do you wish to say anything? You are not
obliged to say anything unless you wish to do so
but whatever you say will be taken down in
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 7
Miscellaneous Reports S.O. No. 31



writing and may be given in evidence.”
(b) It is only in exceptional cases that questions
relating to the offence should be put to the
accused person after he has been charged or
informed that he may be prosecuted. Such
questions may be put where they are
necessary for the purpose of preventing or min-
imising harm or loss to some other person or to
the public or for clearing up an ambiguity in a
previous answer or statement.
Any questions put and answers given relating to
the offence must be contemporaneously recorded
in full and the record signed by that person or, if
he refuses, by the interrogating officer.
(c) When such a person is being questioned, or
elects to make a statement, a record shall be
kept of the time and place at which any
questioning or statement began and ended and
of the persons present.
IV. Nothing in Rules I and II shall render any state-
ment inadmissible in evidence merely because no
caution was given, provided that it is made before
there is time to caution the person making it, but in
any such case he should be cautioned as soon as
possible.
V. All written statements made after caution shall be
taken in the following manner:
(a) If a person says that he wants to make a state-
ment he shall be told that it is intended to
make a written record of what he says. He shall
always be asked whether he wishes to write
down himself what he wants to say; if he says
that he cannot write or that he would like
someone to write it for him, a police officer may
offer to write the statement for him. If he
accepts the offer the police officer shall, before
starting, ask the person making the statement
8 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 31 Miscellaneous Reports



to sign or make his mark to the following:
“I wish to make a statement. I want some-
one to write down what I say. I have been
told that I need not say anything unless I
wish to do so and that whatever I say may
be given in evidence.”
(b) Any person writing his own statement
shall be allowed to do so without any
prompting as distinct from indicating to
him what matters are material.
(c) The person making the statement, if he is
going to write it himself, shall be asked to
write out and sign, before writing what he
wants to say, the following:
“I make this statement of my own free will.
I have been told that I need not say any-
thing unless I wish to do so and that what-
ever I say may be given in evidence.”
(d) Whenever a police officer writes the state-
ment, he shall take down the exact words
spoken by the person making the state-
ment, without putting any questions other
than such as may be needed to make the
statement coherent, intelligible and rele-
vant to the material matters: he shall not
prompt him.
(e) When the writing of a statement by a
police officer is finished the person making
it shall be asked to read it and to make any
corrections, alterations or additions he
wishes. When he has finished reading it he
shall be asked to write and sign or make
his mark on the following Certificate at the
end of the statement:
“I have read the above statement and I have
been told that I can correct, alter or add
anything I wish. This statement is mine. I
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 9
Miscellaneous Reports S.O. No. 31



have made it of my own free will.”
(f) If the person who has made a statement, having
read it, refuses to write the above-mentioned
Certificate at the end of it or to sign it, the senior
police officer present shall record on the state-
ment itself and in the presence of the      person
making it, what has happened. If the person
making the statement cannot read, or refuses to
read it, the officer who has taken it down shall
read it over to him and ask whether he would
like to correct, alter or add anything and to put
his signature or make his mark at the end. The
police officer shall then certify on the statement
itself what he has done.
VI. If at any time after a person has been charged with or has
been informed that he may be prosecuted for an offence a
police officer wishes to bring to the notice of that person any
written statement made by another person who in respect
of the same offence has also been charged or informed that
he may be prosecuted, he shall hand to that person a true
copy of such written statement but nothing shall be said or
done to invite any reply or comment. If that person says
that he would like to make a statement in reply, or starts to
say something, he shall at once be cautioned or further
cautioned as prescribed by Rule 111(a).
VII Persons other than police officers charged with the duty of
investigating offences or charging offenders shall, so far as
may be practicable, comply with these Rules.
A
DMINISTRATIVE DIRECTIONS ON INTERROGATION
AND THE TAKING OF STATEMENTS
1. Procedure generally
(a) When possible statements of persons under caution
should be written on the forms provided for the pur-
pose. Police Officers’ notebooks should be used for
10 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 31 Miscellaneous Reports



taking statements only when no forms are         avail-
able.
(b) When a person is being questioned or elects to make
a statement, a record should be kept of the time or
times at which, during the questioning or making of
a statement there were intervals or refreshment was
taken. The nature of the refreshment should be
noted. In no circumstances should alcoholic drink be
given.
(c) In writing down a statement the words used should
not be translated into “official” vocabulary; this may
give a misleading impression of the genuineness of
the statement.
(d) Care should be taken to avoid any suggestion that
the person’s answers can only be used in evidence
against him, as this may prevent an innocent person
making a statement which might help to clear him
of the charge.
2. Record of interrogation
Rule II and Rule III (c) demand that a record should be kept of
the following matters and preserved for future evidence:
(a) When, after being cautioned in accordance with Rule
II the person is being questioned or elects to make a
statement a record of the time and place at which
any such questioning began and ended and of the
persons present.
(b) When, after being cautioned in accordance with Rule
III(a) or (b) a person is being questioned or elects to
make a statement a record of the time and place at
which any questioning and statement began and
ended and of the persons present. 
In addition to the records required by these Rules full records
of the following matters should additionally be kept:
(a) of the time or times at which cautions were taken;
(b) of the time when a charge was made and/or the
person was arrested; and
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 11
Miscellaneous Reports S.O. No. 31



(c) of the matters referred to in paragraph I (b) above.
If two or more police officers are present when the questions
are being put or the statement made, the records made should be
countersigned by the other officers present.
3. Comfort and refreshment
Reasonable arrangements should be made for the comfort and
refreshment of persons in attendance for questioning or from
whom statements are being taken. Whenever practicable both the
person being questioned or making a statement and the
officers asking the questions or taking the statement should be
seated.
4. Interrogation of children and young persons
As far as practicable children (whether suspected of an offence
or not) should only be interviewed in the presence of a parent or
guardian, or, in their absence, some person who is not a police
officer and is of the same sex as the child. A child or young person
should not be arrested, nor even interviewed at school if such
action can possibly be avoided. Where it is found essential to con-
duct the interview at school, this should be done only with the
consent and in the presence of the head teacher or his nominee.
5. Interrogation of foreigners
In the case of a foreigner making a statement in his native
language:
(a) The interpreter should take down the statement in
the language in which it is made.
(b) An official English translation should be made in
due course and be proved as an exhibit with the orig-
inal statement.
(c) The foreigner should sign the statement at (a).
Apart from the question of apparent unfairness, to obtain the
signature of a suspect to an English translation of what he said in
12 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 31 Miscellaneous Reports



a foreign language can have little or no value as evidence if the
suspect disputes the accuracy of this record of his statement.
6. Authentication of statements of suspected or accused
persons
As far as practicable, and most especially in cases of serious
crime, statements by persons under suspicion or charge should be
authenticated by a senior police officer or by some responsible
member of the community who shall certify thereon whether the
person who gives any such statement acknowledges that he gave
it voluntarily.
7. Supply  to  accused  persons  of  written  statement  of
charges
(a) The following procedure should be adopted when-
ever a charge is preferred against a person arrested
without warrant for any offence:
As soon as a charge has been accepted by the appropriate police
officer, the accused person should be given a written notice
containing a copy of the entry in the charge sheet or book giving
particulars of the offence with which he is charged. So far as
possible the particulars of the charge should be stated in simple
language so that the accused person may understand it, but they
should also show clearly the precise offence in law with which he
is charged. Where the offence charged is a statutory one, it should
be sufficient for the latter purpose to quote the section of the
statute which created the offence. The written notice should
include some statement on the lines of the caution given orally to
the accused person in accordance with the judges’ Rules after a
charge has been preferred. It is suggested that the form of notice
should begin with the following words:
“You are charged with the offence(s) shown below.
You are not obliged to say anything unless you wish
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 13
Miscellaneous Reports S.O. No. 31



to do so, but whatever you say will be taken down in
writing and may be given in evidence”.
(b) Once the accused person has appeared before the court it is
not necessary to serve him with a written notice of any fur-
ther charges which may be preferred. If, however, the police
decide, before he has appeared before a court, to modify the
charge or to prefer further charges, it is  desirable that the
person concerned should be formally charged with the
further offence and given a written copy of the charge as
soon as it is possible to do so having regard to the particu-
lar circumstances of the case. If the accused person has
then been released on bail, it may not always be practicable
or reasonable to prefer the new charge at once, and in cases
where he is due to surrender to his bail within forty-eight
hours or in other cases of difficulty it will be sufficient for
him to be formally charged with the  further offence and
served with a written notice of the charge after he has
surrendered to his bail and before 'he appears before the
court.
8. Facilities for defence
(a) A person in custody should be allowed to speak on the
telephone to his solicitor or counsel or to his friend
provided that no hindrance is reasonably likely to be caused
to the processes of investigation, or the administration of
justice by his doing so.
He should be supplied on request with writing materials
and his letters should be sent by post or otherwise with the
least possible delay. Additionally, telegrams should be sent
at once, at his own expense .
(b) Persons in custody should not only be informed orally of the
rights and facilities available to them, but in addition,
notices describing them should be displayed at convenient
14 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 31 Miscellaneous Reports



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 7
Miscellaneous Reports S.O. No. 31