TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
STANDING  ORDERS  39
TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND ELECTRICAL SYSTEM



2 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 39 Telecommunication and Electrical System
Telecommunications  and  Electrical  System
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
SECTION
1. Telecommunications System
PART  I
TELEPHONES
2. Installation and use of telephones 
3. Telephone System
4. Answering the Telephone System
(1) Direct Dialling
(2) The P.A.B.X. (Private Automatic Branch Exchange)
(3) “999” Emergency
5. Opening of Registers
6. Keeping of Registers
7. First Division Officers’ Telephone
8. Delivery of Telephone Messages to Members of the Public 
9. Overseas telephone calls
10. Telephone Courtesy
PART  II
R
ADIO TELEPHONE SYSTEM
11. Radio Telephone System
12. Police Control
13. Sub-Control Station
14. Radio Telephone
15. Keeping of the Register
16. Administering of Control Room
17. Administration of Sub-Control
18. Duties of the Second Division Officer-in-charge of Control/Sub-
Controls/Fixed Units
19. Radio Telephone Operators
20. Radio Check
21. Response to Emergency Calls



PART  III
TELECOMMUNICATION BRANCH
22. Functions of Telecommunication Branch
23. Officer in charge
24. Responsibility of Officer in charge
25. Technician
26. Telecommunication Technician
27. Emergency Generators Technicians
28. Electrical Technician
29. General care and maintenance of equipment
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 3
Telecommunication and Electrical System S.O. No. 39



1. (1) “Telecommunication System” in the Police Service refers
to the means by which messages are transmitted and received
through electromagnetic waves.
(2) The system includes Telephones and Radio Telephones.
PART  I
T
ELEPHONES
2. (1) Telephones are installed at all Branches, Sections,
Police Stations and offices for use by members of the Service to
transmit and receive official messages.
(2) (a) Telephones are to be kept locked at all times.
(b) The Second Division Officer in charge of the area
where the telephone is located shall be responsible
for the security of the keys to that telephone.
(3) In addition, members of the public in cases of emergency
and members of the Service making private calls may be allowed
to use the telephone. In both cases, prior permission of the Second
Division Officer in charge must be sought and the persons making
the request are required to pay the appropriate toll for such calls
and an entry made in the Telephone Toll Book.
3. There are three (3) telephone systems in operation in the
Police Service—
(a) The Direct Dialling System.
(b) The P.A.B.X. (Private Automatic Branch Exchange)
System.
(c) 999 Emergency System (E999).
4. Police Officers answering the Telephone System shall
do so in the following manner:
(1) Direct Dialling
(a) The Police Officer answering the System shall
identify his Branch/Section/Station/Post/Office,
followed by his number, rank, name and a
greeting to the caller: For example, “St. James
Police Station No. 12345 Constable Ali speak-
ing, Good morning. Can I help you?
Tele-
communica-
tions System
Installation
and use of
telephones 
Telephone
System
Answering
the Telephone
System
4 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 39 Telecommunication and Electrical System



(b) Police Officers sending messages must first
identify themselves.
(c) However, in order to reduce telephone toll
charges, messages that are to be sent long
distance must be prepared on the appropri-
ate form and transmitted by Radio
Telephone.
(2) The P.A.B.X. (Private Automatic Branch
Exchange)
(a) The operator of a P.A.B.X. Board, when
answering the System, need not identify
himself but shall do so politely, by identify-
ing the Organisation, followed by a greeting:
For example, “Police Administration, Good
Day. Can I help you?
(b) If the caller request the identity of a
P.A.B.X. operator, he shall give his number,
rank and name. However, members of the
Service must avoid trying to identify the
P.A.B.X. operator as the process could waste
time.
(3) “999” Emergency (E999)
(a) The “999” Telephone System at Stations
shall be used exclusively for receiving
“emergency calls”.
(b) Police Officers answering the “999” emer-
gency telephones, shall do so in the follow-
ing manner, “Police Emergency”.
(c) The Police Officer receiving the call shall
extract sufficient relevant information from
the caller in order to determine what action
should be taken and to ensure that, where it
becomes necessary to visit the scene, it can
be done without much difficulty.
5. It shall be the duty of the Second Division Officer in charge
of Branches/Sections/Stations/Offices to open and maintain the
following registers:
(a) Telephone Message Book
(b) Telephone Toll Register.
Opening of
Registers
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 5
Telecommunication and Electrical System S.O. No. 39



Telephone Message Book
6. (1) (a) The Telephone Message Book shall be used to record
in detail all messages received or transmitted.
(b) In recording a telephone message, to ensure
accuracy, the Receiving Officer shall repeat the
message until the sender is satisfied that it has been
correctly received. To indicate that this action has
been taken, the Receiving Officer shall place the
letter “R” in red at the end of the message.
(c) Number all messages consecutively each month com-
mencing with the number one (1).
(d) Number In Messages in blue ink and Out Messages
in red ink, maintaining the sequence of numbering
during the month.
(e) Telephone Messages involving reports shall be
immediately transferred to the Station Diary and
cross-referenced with the Telephone Message Book.
Telephone Toll Book
(2) (a) Two Telephone Toll Registers shall be kept for every
telephone at Station. These Registers must be used
alternatively on a monthly basis.
(b) Details of toll charges whether official or private
shall be entered in this register in such a manner as
to facilitate checking by the auditors in accordance
with Appendix “A”.
(c) Monies collected from private telephone calls shall be
entered in the Cash Book and paid to the Treasury.
However, where a Cash Book is not kept, such
monies shall be paid to the office of the Officer in
charge of Finance Branch at the end of each month.
The officer receiving the toll charges shall issue a
receipt and attach same to the appropriate page of
the telephone toll register.
(d) The First Division Officer to whom a telephone is
assigned or the Second Division Officer in charge of a
Station/Office shall certify at the end of each month,
the correctness of toll charges made during that par-
ticular month and submit the register to the Officer
in charge of Finance Branch to reach him not later
than the fourth day of the following month.
6 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 39 Telecommunication and Electrical System
Keeping of
Registers



7. First Division Officers with telephones at their private
residences, in order to claim payment or refund in respect to
rental of the telephone and official calls made, shall comply with
the following instructions:
(a) The telephone must be installed in the officer’s
name.
(b) The officer is to keep and maintain a written record
of all official calls made which shall include the
destination, times, duration and telephone numbers
of such calls.
(c) Submit the telephone bills along with the record for
the particular period claimed to the Officer in charge
of Finance Branch when requesting a refund of
payment.
8. Telephone messages received at a Police Station for mem-
bers of the public in relation to serious accidents, illness, death or
other emergency, shall be conveyed to their destinations as soon
as practicable.
9. Police Officers are prohibited from making overseas calls on
Station/Section/Office telephones.
10. Members of the Service must appreciate the importance of
presenting an acceptable image to the community.
Good manners are essential when dealing with people; they
are especially important on the telephone.
An organisation is viewed and accepted based on the
efficiency of its communication system. In order to achieve this
objective, every effort must be made to behave in a dignified
professional manner and to treat the public with respect. It must
be borne in mind that it costs nothing to be courteous and helpful
whilst interacting with members of the community through the
telephone system. However, discourtesy could cause irreparable
damage to the image of the individual and consequently the entire
Police Service.
First Division
Officers’
Telephone
Delivery of
Telephone
Messages to
members of
the Public 
Overseas
telephone
calls
Telephone
Courtesy
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 7
Telecommunication and Electrical System S.O. No. 39



Remember these tips when using the telephone—
Promptness: Answer the telephone promptly—no one
likes to wait.
Pleasantness: Y our voice tone should be professional.
Cultivate “the voice with a smile”. Let the
caller hear a polite, pleasant, friendly voice.
Speak clearly.
Courtesy : Identify the name of your Branch/
Section/Station Office and yourself whether
you are calling or being called. Avoid using
telephone slang expressions, e.g., “Hang
On”, “Yea”, Say instead “Please Hold”,
“Would You Like To Hold?” “One Moment
Please”. 
Remember the words “Thank You”, “You’re
Welcome”. Use the caller’s name.
Attention: Keep your mind on the conversation and
caller. Do not try to do something else while
you are on the phone.
Accuracy: Get messages correctly by recording what is
said and deliver promptly. Get the caller’s
name (address/organisation) correctly on an
incoming call. If you are doing the calling be
sure that you have the correct telephone
number, extension number, name of depart-
ment or organisation and correct pronuncia-
tion of the person’s name.
Understanding: Do not keep the caller waiting on the phone
while you look for information. If you are
going to be longer than a minute, inform the
caller and suggest that he calls back. 
Apologise for errors or delays.
Keep a pad and pencil handy, so that you
can quickly note important details.
8 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 39 Telecommunication and Electrical System



Competence : If a call is wrongly directed, apologise and
redirect immediately.
If you are disconnected, the proper pro-
cedure is for you to call back if you initiated
the call, or wait for the person to call back.
Be tactful when refusing a request: “if you
will come into our office, we will be happy to
check that for you”, is better than “we do not
give that information to people on the
phone”.
It is better to spend minutes keeping the
public happy rather than spending time
regaining their good will.
PART  II
R
ADIO TELEPHONE SYSTEM
11. The Radio Telephone System comprises of Fixed, Mobile
and Portable Units.
12. “Police Control” refers to the principal station in the Radio
Telephone Network responsible for supervising and controlling
wireless communication throughout the Police Service.
13. “Sub-Control Station” refers to a station in the
Telecommunication Network responsible for the supervision of
radio telephonic communication for specific stations and
vehicles/mobile units in a designated area.
14. Radio Telephones are installed at all Stations/Sections and
are referred to as “Fixed Units”; those Radio Telephones installed
in vehicles are referred to as “Mobile Units”.
Radio Telephones that are issued to individuals are
considered “Portable Units” and referred to as “Handy
Talkie/Walkie Talkie”.
Radio
Telephone
System
Police Control
Sub-Control
Station
Radio
Telephone
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 9
Telecommunication and Electrical System S.O. No. 39



15. It shall be the responsibility of the officer in charge of
Control/Sub-Control Rooms, Police Stations and Sections
equipped with a Telecommunication System to keep and maintain
the following which are to be used for receiving and transmitting
messages:
(a) “Radio Log Book” as shown at Appendix “B”.
(b) In Message Form as shown at Appendix “C”.
(c) Out Message Form as shown at Appendix “D”.
16. The Police Control Room shall be under the command
of a First Division Officer.
17. The administration of all Sub-Control falls under the direct
supervision of the officer in charge of the Division in which they
are located.
18. It shall be the duty of the Second Division Officers in charge
of Control/Sub-Controls/Fixed Units to—
(a) ensure that the Radio Telephone Systems under
their control are on the air at all times;
(b) exercise firm control over all wireless transmission
emanating from their units.
19. It shall be the duty of all Police Officers whilst operating
a Radio Telephone System, to comply with the following
instructions:
(a) ensure that the frequency is free before transmitting;
in addition seek permission from Control or Sub-
Control to communicate with any other unit;
(b) answer all calls without delay. When transmissions
are being received, acknowledge all such transmis-
sions at the end;
(c) keep frequencies clear for official use;
(d) all messages must be recorded;
(e) messages transmitted must be at dictation speed
with frequent breaks to ensure accuracy;
Keeping of
the Register
Administer-
ing of Control
Room
Administra-
tion of Sub-
Control
Duties of the
Second
Division
Officer in
charge of
Control/Sub-
Controls/
Fixed Units
Radio
Telephone
Operators
10 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 39 Telecommunication and Electrical System



(f) all messages shall be treated as confidential and
communicated as required;
(g) personal and unofficial messages shall not be trans-
mitted except with the permission of the officer in
charge;
(h) unauthorised persons inclusive of members of the
Service who are not on duty, shall not be permitted
in any Control or Sub-Control Rooms or allowed to
use the Radio Telephone at Station;
(i) messages classified as “Secret” or “Private and
Confidential” shall not be transmitted by Radio
Telephone but such messages shall be transmitted by
telephone;
(j) “Flash Messages” take precedence over all other
messages and must be transmitted immediately on
receipt;
(Flash Messages refer to messages with specific
information in respect of an event which requires
immediate police action).
(k) details of the event shall be subsequently recorded;
(l) urgent messages received for an officer shall be
delivered immediately to him. If such message is
received while the officer is not at his work place,
then all methods must be employed to have such
messages delivered to the officer;
(m) seek permission from Control/Sub-Control to use
another channel if the channel normally used is
defective;
(n) when it becomes necessary to transmit messages
using “phonetic codes”, the international phonetic
alphabet, phonetic numbers and standard phrases as
shown at Appendix “E” shall be used;
(o) take proper care of the equipment to ensure that it is
not damaged or abused;
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 11
Telecommunication and Electrical System S.O. No. 39



(p) when instituting communication he shall—
(i) state his destination;
(ii) state his location;
Example: A caller at Toco desirous of
communicating with Tobago
shall state: “Tobago, (destina-
tion) followed by “Toco” (loca-
tion).
The operator who receives the signal as
mentioned above, shall state “Roger
Toco, Tobago is standing by.
The caller at Toco shall then proceed to
communicate with Tobago.
(iii) at the end of the communication the
“standard phrases”, whichever is applica-
ble, will be used.
20. (1) Radio Telephone Operators assigned to “Fixed Units” shall
check their system at 6.00 a.m. each day with their Sub-Control or
Police Control whichever is applicable to ensure that their sets are in
proper working condition.
(2) In the case of “Mobile and Portable Units” the operators
shall check their sets with their Control, Sub-Control or Station,
whichever is applicable, whenever they are leaving on duty with
such system.
(3) Where a Radio Telephone System is found to be mal-
functioning, the Second Division Officer in charge of the area
where such unit is located, shall immediately inform the Officer in
charge of the Telecommunication Branch.
21. (1) The operator at Control/Sub-Control/ Station on receipt of
a “999 Emergency Call”, shall—
(a) elicit sufficient information including the address
from the caller;
(b) inform the Second Division Officer in charge of
Control/ Sub-Control/Station.
Radio Check
Response to
Emergency
Calls
12 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 39 Telecommunication and Electrical System



(2) The Second Division Officer-in-charge of Control/Sub-
Control/Station shall immediately despatch a vehicle to the scene,
the officers despatched shall immediately proceed to the scene, on
arrival at the scene, the Second Division Officer shall—
(a) inform his despatcher of his arrival;
(b) obtain details of the report;
(c) take appropriate action;
(d) relay the results of the action taken to the
despatcher;
(e) proceed on any follow up action.
PART  III
T
ELECOMMUNICATION BRANCH
22. The functions of the Telecommunication Branch are to—
(a) install, maintain and repair telecommunication
equipment;
(b) maintain and repair emergency generators;
(c) install, maintain and repair intercom sets;
(d) inspect, maintain and repair antenna towers at
Police Buildings;
(e) effect, maintain and repair electrical installations.
23. The Telecommunication Branch shall be under the com-
mand of a First Division Officer.
24. It shall be the responsibility of the officer in charge of the
Telecommunication Branch to:
(a) ensure that visits and inspections are carried out by
members of his Branch to all Police Stations and
Buildings equipped with telecommunication system;
Functions of
Telecommuni-
cation Branch
Officer in
charge
Responsibility
of Officer in
charge
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 13
Telecommunication and Electrical System S.O. No. 39



(b) make arrangements to instruct all telecommuni-
cation operators on the proper care and
maintenance of the equipment;
(c) ensure that all stores in possession of the
Storekeeper are inspected once per quarter;
(d) ensure that all reports of breakdowns of equipment
controlled by the Branch are immediately attended
to by the relevant technicians;
(e) keep and maintain a register known as the
“Equipment Register” in which shall be recorded the
installation, complaints, defects, repairs and any
other relevant information;
(f) organise regular lectures and training sessions for
all personnel attached to the Branch.
25. Personnel attached to this Branch as “technicians” must be
trained in the relevant field in which they have to perform. There
are three (3) main categories of technicians attached to this
Branch—
(a) Telecommunication Technician
(b) Emergency Generators Technician
(c) Electrical Technician.
26. It shall be the duty of the Police Telecommunication
Technician to comply with the following instructions to:
(a) install, maintain and repair telecommunication
equipment and office intercom systems in the Police
Service as instructed by the officer in charge of the
Telecommunication Branch;
(b) notify the officer in charge of the Telecommuni-
cation Branch of all breakdowns and irregularities in
the operation of the equipment; and
(c) inspect Telecommunication and Intercom Systems
including antenna towers as instructed by the
officer in charge.
Technician
Telecom-
munication
Technician
14 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 39 Telecommunication and Electrical System



27. It shall be the duty of Police Emergency Generators
Technician to comply with the following instructions:
(a) maintain and repair “Emergency Generators” in the
Police Service;
(b) visit stations, inspect emergency generators and
report and correct breakdowns and/or irregularities.
Report cases of improper handling and maintenance
of such equipment, giving recommendations; and
(c) instruct Police Officers in the operation and care of
“Emergency Generators”.
28. It shall be the duty of the Police Electrical Technician to—
(a) effect minor electrical installations, repair defects
and generally maintain electrical systems;
(b) make recommendations for replacement of defective
equipment;
(c) report abuse and improper maintenance of all such
equipment and systems.
29. (1) It shall be the responsibility of the Officer in charge
of Control/Sub-Control/Station/Section to ensure that Police
Officers using the telecommunication and emergency generator
equipment in the Police Service, exercise due care in the use of
such equipment to prevent frequent breakdowns.
(2) The following instructions are to be adhered to regarding
the daily care of the equipment:
(a) report all signs of faults to the Second Division
Officer in charge of the Telecommunication Branch;
(b) ensure that defects are repaired by technicians only;
(c) equipment must be kept clean. (Water, dirt and dust
can cause serious interference with the working of
equipment);
Emergency
Generators
Technicians
Electrical
Technician
General care
and mainte-
nance of
equipment
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 15
Telecommunication and Electrical System S.O. No. 39



(d) all electrical plugs and sockets must be kept clean;
(e) microphone and headphone cords must be examined
regularly for signs of damage;
(f) objects must not be placed on telecommunication
equipment;
(g) telecommunication equipment fitted in vehicles
must not be covered in any way;
(h) handy Talkie/Walkie Talkie antennas must not be
tampered with or removed from units. These units
must be kept “on charge” when not in actual use;
(i) areas where emergency generators are installed
must be kept clean and tidy;
(j) diesel generators must not be permitted to run short
of fuel;
(k) the fuel and batteries of emergency generators must
be examined daily.
16 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 39 Telecommunication and Electrical System



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 17
Telecommunication and Electrical System S.O. No. 39




18 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 39 Telecommunication and Electrical System




TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 19
Telecommunication and Electrical System S.O. No. 39




20 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 39 Telecommunication and Electrical System




TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 21
Telecommunication and Electrical System S.O. No. 39




22 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 39 Telecommunication and Electrical System




TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 23
Telecommunication and Electrical System S.O. No. 39
