TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
STANDING  ORDERS  36
POLICE SUPERVISEE



Police Supervisee
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
SECTION
1. Police Supervisee
2. Crime
3. Authorised Officer
4. Police Supervisees Register 
5. Responsibility of  the Officer in charge Criminal Office Records
6. Responsibility of the Officer in charge of the Division
7. Responsibility of the Second Division Officer-in-charge of the Station
8. Submission of monthly returns
9. Additional Guide Lines when dealing with Supervisee
2 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 36 Police Supervisee



1. “Police Supervisee” refers to a person placed under police
supervision for a specific period immediately on his discharge
from prison, after having been convicted on indictment for any
crime and who, prior to his conviction on indictment, had been
convicted on an indictable offence.
2. For the purpose of this Order, the expression “Crime” is
subject to section 2(2) of the Prevention of Crimes Act, Chap. 10:01
and refers to any indictable offence not punishable with death, or
the offence of uttering false or counterfeit coin, or possession of
counterfeit gold or silver coins, or the offence of obtaining goods or
money by false pretences, or the offence of conspiracy to defraud
or any offence under section 30 of the Larceny Act, Chap. 11:12.
3. The Commissioner has appointed the Second Division
Officer in charge of Stations as the “authorised” officer to whom
police supervisees are to report immediately on their discharge
from prison and thereafter once every month until the period of
supervision has ended.
4. All Second Division Officers in charge of Stations shall open
and maintain a Register known as, “Police Supervisees’ Register”
as shown at Appendix “A” in which will be entered the particulars
of the supervisee and his monthly visits.
5. The Officer in charge of the Criminal Records Office imme-
diately on the discharge from prison of a convicted  person, subject
to police supervision, shall cause the following to be done:
(a) interview the supervisee with a view to obtaining
information relative to his/her intended place of
residence and other particulars in relation to
his/her whereabouts during the period of
supervision;
(b) inform him/her to whom, where and when he/she
will report;
(c) issue him/her with the Police Supervisee’s Booklet
and obtain a receipt therefor;
(d) submit to the Officer in charge of the Division  par-
ticulars of the supervisee, including—
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 3
Police Supervisee S.O. No. 36
Police
Supervisee
Crime
Authorised
Officer
Police
Supervisees
Register 
Responsi-
bility of  the
Officer in
charge
Criminal
Office
Records



(i) a full face photograph;
(ii) aliases; 
(iii) address;
(iv) criminal records number;
(v) date of discharge; and 
(vi) date of expiration of supervision.
6. The Officer in charge of the Division to which the
supervisee is to report shall, on receipt of the information as at
paragraph 4(b), send it to the Second Division Officer in charge of
the Police Station concerned.
7. The Second Division Officer-in-charge of the Police  Station,
on receipt of the information as at paragraph 5, shall—
(a) enter the particulars of the “Police Supervisee” in
the register and affix the photograph to the top left
hand side of the page on which the particulars are
listed;
(b) inform the officers under his command of the
existence of the supervisee and draw their
attention to the particulars and photograph of the
supervisee in the register;
(c) verify the particulars of the supervisee as entered in
the register including his address on his first visit to
the station;
(d) on each subsequent visit he shall be interviewed
and his whereabouts and other particulars noted;
(e) submit to the Officer in charge of the Division, a
monthly return of all supervisees in their district
who failed to report during the calendar month.
See Specimen as shown at Appendix “B”;
(f) take legal action where necessary in accordance
with provisions of the Prevention of Crimes Act,
Chap. 10:01;
(g) retrieve the booklet on the expiration of his period of
supervision;
(h) submit the supervisee’s booklet to the Officer in
charge of Criminal Records Office through the
Officer in charge of the Division.
4 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 36 Police Supervisee
Responsi-
bility of the
Officer in
charge of the
Division
Responsi-
bility of the
Second
Division
Officer-in-
charge of the
Station



8. The Officer in charge of the Division shall collate the
Monthly returns from each Station and submit the collated return
to the Officer in charge of the Criminal Records Office by the 10th
of the succeeding month.
9. In dealing with a supervisee the additional guidelines must
be observed when dealing with Supervisee:
(a) surveillance must be constantly and discreetly paid
to the supervisee;
(b) a supervisee should not be told to leave a particular
district no matter how unwelcome he/she may be;
(c) the privacy of a supervisee should not be invaded on
frivolous grounds.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 5
Police Supervisee S.O. No. 36
Submission
of monthly
returns
Additional
Guidelines
when dealing
with
Supervisee



6 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 36 Police Supervisee



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 7
Police Supervisee S.O. No. 36