TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
STANDING  ORDERS  46
MARSHALS OF THE HIGH COURT,  BAILIFFS
AND JUSTICES OF THE PEACE



Marshals of the High Court, Bailiffs
and Justices of the Peace
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
PART  I
SECTION
1. Marshal
2. Bailiff
3. Request by Marshals and Bailiffs
4. Duty of the Second Division Officer in charge
5. Duty of the Police Officer Detailed
PART  II
J
USTICES OF THE PEACE
6. Intepretation
7. Duty of Senior Second Division Officer
8. Duty of Police Officers
9. Duty of Senior Second Division Officer to post list
10. Act of indiscipline
2 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 46 Marshals of the High Court, Bailiffs and Justices of the Peace



1.“Marshal” refers to the Registrar, Deputy Registrar, Assistant
Registrar and any other public officer so designated by the
President or the Minister responsible for Legal Affairs.
2. “Bailiff” refers to a person appointed by a Court with the
following authority:
(a) to serve, process and execute “Court Orders” in
respect of the seizure and levy of goods of a debt and
the forfeiture of a recognizance;
(b) to enforce judgment of a High Court by writs of
possession and delivery; 
(c) Bailiffs are either employed with the State or self-
employed/private bailiffs.
3. High Court Marshals and Bailiffs may from time to time
request the assistance of Police Officers in executing process
ordered by the Courts.
4. Whenever a Marshal/Bailiff requests assistance from Police
Officers, the Second Division Officer in charge of a Station shall:
(a) satisfy himself that the person requesting the assis-
tance has authority to act as a Marshal/Bailiff;
(b) ensure that the instrument to be executed is valid,
detail sufficient uniformed Police Officers as is
necessary to assist the Marshal/Bailiff;
(c) brief the officers detailed on their role and
function;
(d) ensure that a judgment warrant, writ for order of
possession or an injunction is not executed or served
on a Sunday, except with leave of the Court;
(e) in the case of a self-employed/private bailiff
“extra duty rates” must be charged for the services of
Police Officers.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 3
Marshals of the High Court, Bailiffs and Justices of the Peace S.O. No. 46
Marshal
Bailiff
Request by
Marshals and
Bailiffs
Duty of the
Second
Division
Officer in
charge



5. The Police Officer detailed to assist the Marshal/Bailiff
shall:
(a) ensure that the address of the person named in the
instrument is the address of the person on whom the
instrument is served or executed; 
(b) ensure that the identity of the person(s) mentioned
in the instrument are those upon whom the process
is executed;
(c) ensure that no “breach of the peace” is committed;
(d) ensure that the Marshal/Bailiff or his assistants do
not use  unnecessary force in the execution of the
process;
(e) adopt a position that will allow at all times, the
visibility of the persons executing the process and
the person(s) upon whom the process is being
executed;
(f) on return to Station, report to the Second Division
Officer in charge, what action has been taken and
make an entry to that effect in the Station Diary.
PART  II
J
USTICES OF THE PEACE
6. (1) “Justices of the Peace” refers to persons appointed by the
President by warrant and includes a Clerk of the Peace to perform
the following functions:
(a) the issuing of Summonses;
(b) the issuing of Warrants (Warrant of Arrest and
Search Warrants);
(c) the granting of bail to persons in custody and the
fixing of the amount of bail;
(d) the taking of Recognisances;
(e) authenticating statements given voluntarily by per-
sons arrested for and accused of committing crime;
(f) the Administering of Oaths (as ex officio Com-
missioners of Affidavits).
(2) The persons hereunder are Justices of the Peace by
virtue of their office—Magistrates, Mayors, Deputy Mayors,
Chairmen and Vice-Chairmen of Regional Corporations, Officers
of the First Division and Inspectors of the Police Service.
4 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 46 Marshals of the High Court, Bailiffs and Justices of the Peace
Duty of the
Police Officer
Detailed
Interpretation



7. Whenever a Justice of the Peace arrives at a Police Station
in his official capacity, the Senior Second Division Officer at the
station shall:
(a) respectfully satisfy himself that the person is in fact
a Justice of the Peace; 
(b) inform the Justice of the Peace of the name of the
defendant or accused and the offence for which the
person in custody is charge and whether the said
accused person has any previous convictions;
(c) provide every facility, courtesy and co-operation
including proper seating accommodation.
8. (1) Police Officers are authorised to assist accused persons
and/or their relatives or friends by showing them the list of
Justices of  the Peace for the Station district.
(2) Police Officers shall not recommend a particular Justice
of the Peace to an accused person or to the friend and relative of
an accused person.
9. The Senior Second Division Officer shall ensure that a list of
Justices of the Peace for his station district is posted on the Public
Notice Board in the station.
10. A Police Officer who refuses to co-operate with a Justice of
the Peace commits an offence against discipline.
Duty of
Senior Second
Division
Officer
Duty of Police
Officers
Duty of
Senior
Division
Officer to post
list
Act of
indiscipline
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 5
Marshals of the High Court, Bailiffs and Justices of the Peace S.O. No. 46



APPENDIX  ‘A’
6 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 46 Marshals of the High Court, Bailiffs and Justices of the Peace