TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
STANDING  ORDERS  49
CARE AND MAINTENANCE OF POLICE VEHICLES



Care and Maintenance of Police Vehicles
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
SECTION
1. Police Driver/Motor Cyclist
2. Vehicle History Sheet
3. Job Sheet
4. Vehicle Repair Centre
5. Vehicle Log Book
6. Marked Vehicle
7. Officer in Charge of Transport
8. Responsibility of the Officer in Charge of Transport Branch
9. Responsibility of the Officer in Charge of Administration Branch
10. Divisional Motor Vehicle
11. Guidelines to inspecting Vehicles
12. Responsibility of the Officer in Charge of Division/Branch/ Section/Unit
13. Responsibility of the Officer in Charge of Station/Office
14. Responsibility of the Police Drivers
15. Appointment of Officer to ensure roadworthiness of vehicles
16. Submission of Return
2 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 49 Care and Maintenance of Police Vehicles



1. “Police Driver/Motor Cyclist” refers to a Police Officer who is
the holder of a valid “Driver’s Permit” and authorised by the
Commissioner of Police to drive any of the classes of Police
Vehicles for which there is an endorsement on his Driver’s
Permit. Police Officers shall not drive police vehicles without the
authority of the Commissioner of Police.
2. “Vehicle History Sheet” refers to a document on which is
recorded information pertaining to the purchase, description and
posting of a vehicle. The specimen is shown at Appendix “A”.
3. “Vehicle Job Sheet” refers to a document on which is
recorded defects and repairs done to a vehicle. A specimen is
shown at Appendix “B”.
4. “Vehicle Repair Centre” refers to a place duly appointed for
the repairs and maintenance of police vehicles.
5. “Vehicle Log Book” refers to a register issued in respect of
each police vehicle in which is recorded the kilometres travelled,
the fuel and oil consumption.
6. “Marked Vehicle” refers to a vehicle assigned to the Police
Service with the words “POLICE” painted on, or any other mark/
symbol approved by the Commissioner of Police.
7. (1) The “Transport Branch” shall be under the command of a
First Division Officer.
(2) The Officer in charge of the Transport Branch shall be
responsible for the general operations of the vehicle repair centres
including equipment/tools and the personnel attached thereto.
8. The Officer in charge of Transport Branch shall—
(a) make recommendations on the acquiring of vehicles
for the Service;
(b) ensure that repair and maintenance personnel are
adequately trained;
(c) ensure that repair centres are adequately staffed;
Police
Driver/Motor
Cyclist
Vehicle
History Sheet
Job Sheet
Vehicle
Repair Centre
Vehicle Log
Book
Marked
Vehicle
Officer in
charge of
Transport
Responsibility
of the Officer
in charge of
Transport
Branch
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 3
Care and Maintenance of Police Vehicles S.O. No. 49



(d) formulate policies for the efficient management and
control of the vehicle repair centres;
(e) visit repair centres to ascertain whether the instruc-
tions given for the efficient management of the
centre have been adhered to and if not, take neces-
sary action to ensure their compliance;
(f) where a vehicle is taken on the strength of the
Service, the officer in charge of Transport Branch
shall—
(i) prepare a Vehicle History Sheet in
triplicate;
(ii) open and maintain a file, which shall
include—
(1) the original History Sheet and
postings of the vehicle;
(2) documents relevant to the
purchase of the particular vehicle;
(3) copy of the Divisional Monthly
Inspection Sheet;
(4) Job Sheets and Cost of Repairs;
(5) brief report of the circumstances of
an accident and damages done to
the vehicle;
(6) estimate for repairs with respect to
accidents;
(7) any other relevant information
pertaining to the vehicle.
(iii) send the duplicate Vehicle History Sheet
to the Officer in charge of the Division/
Branch/Office where the vehicle is posted;
(iv) send the triplicate Vehicle History Sheet to
the Officer in charge “Administration
Branch”;
(g) cause an abbreviated version of the name of the
Division/Branch/Section/Unit to which a marked
vehicle is posted to be painted in a conspicuous place
on the rear portion of the vehicle.
4 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 49 Care and Maintenance of Police Vehicles



9. The Officer in charge of Administration Branch shall, on
receipt of the triplicate History Sheet from the Officer in charge,
Transport Branch—
(a) enter the information contained in the History Sheet
in a register provided for that purpose;
in addition, the register shall contain the postings
made from time to time of each vehicle and  circum-
stances under which the vehicle is disposed of;
(b) open and maintain a Motor Vehicle file in which
shall be inserted the History Sheet of each vehicle.
10. Each police vehicle shall have a Divisional file which shall
contain— 
(a) the duplicate History Sheet and postings of the vehicle;
(b) copies of the Monthly Vehicular Inspection Report;
(c) the original Certificate of Insurance of the vehicle,
the duplicate of which shall be kept in the vehicle;
(d) any other relevant information pertaining to the vehicle.
11.Police Officers engaged in inspecting vehicles are required to
adhere to the guidelines listed in the “Vehicle Check
Requirements” as shown in Appendix “C”.
12. The officer in charge of a Division/Branch/Section/Unit
shall—
(a) on receipt of a vehicle together with the duplicate
History Sheet, open and maintain a “Divisional
Motor Vehicle File”;
(b) detail a police officer of the rank of Inspector or
above to carry out monthly inspection of each vehicle
attached thereto and submit his findings in dupli-
cate on the appropriate form as shown at Appendix
“D”;
(c) on receipt, of the Vehicle Inspection Form, cause the
duplicate to be filed and the original sent to the
Officer in charge of Transport Branch;
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 5
Care and Maintenance of Police Vehicles S.O. No. 49
Responsi-
bility of the
Officer in
charge of
Administra-
tion Branch
Divisional
Motor Vehicle
Guidelines to
inspecting
Vehicles
Responsi-
bility of the
Officer in
charge of
Division/
Branch/
Section/Unit



(d) whenever a vehicle is transferred from the
Division/Branch/ Section/Unit to another, submit the
Divisional Motor Vehicle File to the Officer in charge
of the Division/Branch/Section/Unit to which the
vehicle is posted;
(e) where a vehicle has been involved in an accident, as
soon as the initial enquiries have been completed,
arrange with the Officer in charge of Transport
Branch in order that the vehicle can be inspected
and an estimate made of the extent and cost of such
damages.
13. The Second Division Officer in charge of a Station/Office shall—
(a) inspect the vehicle(s) attached thereto at least once
per week;
(b) record the findings of the inspection in the Station
Diary;
(c) (i) inform the Officer in charge of the Division/
Branch/Section/Unit of any defects, damages or
missing items discovered;
(ii) where a defect is detected, arrange with the
Officer in charge of the Vehicle Repair Centre
to have such defect repaired;
(iii) where damages or missing items are dis-
covered, in addition to informing the Officer in
charge of Division/Branch/Section/Unit
institute an immediate investigation and
submit the findings and recommendations to
the Officer in charge of the Division within ten
(10) days of such discovery;
(e) where defects, damages or missing items are
reported to him, the procedures mentioned in
paragraphs (ii) and (iii) above are to be followed.
6 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 49 Care and Maintenance of Police Vehicles
Responsi-
bility of the
Officer in
charge of
Station/Office



14. Drivers of police vehicles shall—
(a) on assumption and on completion of a tour of duty—
(i) check the vehicle in accordance with the
“Vehicle Check Requirements” at Appendix “C”;
(ii) report any damages, defects or missing parts
observed to the Second Division Officer in charge;
(b) (i) where during a tour of duty any incident or
accident occurs, he shall report to the Second
Division Officer in charge immediately on his
return to Station/Office the circumstances
surrounding the incident/accident;
(ii) in the case of an accident, in addition to
paragraph 14 (b)(i) comply with the
instructions as laid down in Standing Order 44
“Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control
Investigation And Procedure”;
(c) on arrival at the repair centre with a vehicle for
repairs, prepare the Job Sheet as shown at Appendix
“B” and hand it over to the Second Division Officer
in charge of the Repair Centre;
(d) as far as practicable, on completion of the tour of
duty, the vehicle shall be handed over with the petrol
tank filled and oil sump topped up;
(e) update the Log Book after every journey;
(f) record in the Log Book the issue of fuel and
lubricant;
(g) ensure that the vehicles are kept and maintained
clean and functional.
15. (1) The Officer in charge of a Division/Branch/Section shall,
where necessary appoint an officer in the Division/Branch/Section
with knowledge of repairs and maintenance of vehicles.
(2) The officer so appointed, shall ensure that all vehicles
posted to the Division/Branch/Section are maintained in a road-
worthy condition.
Responsibility
of the Police
Drivers
Appointment
of Officer to
ensure
roadworthi-
ness of
vehicles
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 7
Care and Maintenance of Police Vehicles S.O. No. 49



16. (1) The Second Division Officer in charge of a “Divisional
Workshop Repair Centre” shall submit a monthly return to the
First Division Officer in charge of Transport Branch, showing the
type of repairs done to each vehicle and the cost of such repairs in
the format as shown at Appendix “E”.
(2) Such return shall be submitted to the Assistant
Commissioner, Mobile by the fourth (4th) day of the succeeding
month.
Submission of
Return
8 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 49 Care and Maintenance of Police Vehicles



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 9
Care and Maintenance of Police Vehicles S.O. No. 49



10 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 49 Care and Maintenance of Police Vehicles



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 11
Care and Maintenance of Police Vehicles S.O. No. 49




12 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 49 Care and Maintenance of Police Vehicles




TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 13
Care and Maintenance of Police Vehicles S.O. No. 49




14 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 49 Care and Maintenance of Police Vehicles




TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 15
Care and Maintenance of Police Vehicles S.O. No. 49




16 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 49 Care and Maintenance of Police Vehicles
