TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
STANDING  ORDERS  48
DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURE AND COMPLAINTS



Disciplinary Procedure and Complaints
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
PART I
DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURE
SECTION
1. Authority
2. Definitions
3. Responsibility of Head of Division
4. Responsibility of Reporting Officer
5. Responsibility of Disciplinary Officer
6. Responsibility of Tribunal Prosecutor
7. Rights of an alleged Defaulter
8. Attire at Tribunals
9. Tribunal proceedings to be held in private
10. Procedure for hearing a Disciplinary Tribunal
11. Hearing in the absence of the alleged defaulter
12. Appointment of Special Tribunal
13. Responsibility of the Special Tribunal Appointed
14. Procedure for Appeals
15. Responsibility of First Division Officer in charge of Complaints Division
16. Responsibility of the Executive Officer
17. Suspension/Interdiction from Duty
18. Duty of the Officer serving notice of suspension/interdiction
19. Publication and recording of penalties
PART II
P
ROCEDURE FOR COMPLAINTS AGANIST POLICE OFFICERS
20. Authority, section 3
21. Complaints Division, section 20
22. Complainant, section 3
23. Certified Copy, section 21(4)
24. Main responsibility of the Complaints Division 
25. Section 20(4)
26. Manner of making complaints
27. Issue of Certified Stamp and Prescribed Form
28. Oath of Secrecy
29. Complaints to be treated as secret and confidential
2 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 48 Disciplinary Procedure and Complaints



30. Complaints to Officer other than Second Division Officer in charge
31. Responsibility of Second Division Officer in charge, section 21
32. Duties of the Officer in charge of the division
33. Frivolous Complaints, section 23
34. Re: Investigation of Frivolous Complaints
35. Submission of Findings by Investigator
36. Instructions to the Officer in charge of Division/Branch/Section
37. Obstructing an Investigator
38. Power of the Authority, section 6
39. Police Officers summoned before the Authority 
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 3
Disciplinary Procedure and Complaints S.O. No. 48



PART  I
DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURE
1. (1) Section 123(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of
Trinidad and Tobago, Chap. 1:01 confers upon the Police Service
Commission, the authority to exercise among other things,
disciplinary control over the Police Service.
(2) The Commission by virtue of section 124(1) (c) of the
Constitution and Act 21/87 has delegated part of this function to
the Commissioner of Police and to officers of or above the rank of
Superintendent, appointed in accordance with Regulation 82(1) of
the Police Service Commission (Amendment) Regulations, 1990
(Legal Notice 214/90).
2. In this Standing Order, the following terms shall have the
meanings ascribed hereunder:
(a) Disciplinary Procedure: refers to the process where-
by breaches of discipline emanating from acts or
omissions by Police Officers are reported, investi-
gated and determined.
(b) Head of Division: as referred to in Regulations 81
and 82 of the Police Service Commission
(Amendment) Regulations, 1990, means the most
senior First Division Officer in a
Division/Branch/Section/Unit of or above the rank of
Superintendent appointed in writing as a Standing
or Special Disciplinary Tribunal by the Police
Service Commission.
(c) Tribunal: refers to a body appointed by the Police
Service Commission to hear and determine breaches
of discipline:
(i) where the offence is not delegated, a
Tribunal of three (3) persons shall sit to
hear and determine the facts;
Authority
Definitions
4 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 48 Disciplinary Procedure and Complaints



(ii) where it is a delegated offence, an officer
appointed in writing as a Standing or
Special Disciplinary Tribunal shall sit and
determine such charge and impose anyone
of the penalties prescribed in Regulation
104(1)(f), (a), (h) of the Police Service
Commission Regulations, Chap. 1:01.
(d) Standing Tribunal: refers to the Head of Divisions
“sitting” as a Tribunal Officer to hear and
determine delegated disciplinary matters
emanating from officers attached to his
Division/Branch/Unit.
(e) Special Tribunal: refers to an officer of the rank of
Superintendent and above specially nominated by
the Police Service Commission to sit as a
Disciplinary Tribunal in any delegated matters.
(f) Delegated Offence: refers to any of the offences in
the Second Schedule of the Police Service
Commission Delegation of Powers (Amendment)
Order, 1990.
(g) Non-Delegated Offence: refers to the offences found
in the Police Service Regulations but not listed in
the Second Schedule of the Police Service
Commission Delegation of Powers (Amendment)
Order, 1990 for which the Police Service
Commission retains the authority to hear and
determine.
(h) Disciplinary Officer: refers to an officer to whom acts
or omissions which constitute a breach of discipline
are submitted and who has the authority to deter-
mine the course of action to be adopted, when alleged
breaches of discipline are reported to him.
(i) Reporting Officer: refers to a Police Officer who
serves the alleged defaulter with a warning notice
in accordance with Regulation 81 of the Police
Service Commission (Amendment) Regulations,
1990 for a breach of discipline.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 5
Disciplinary Procedure and Complaints S.O. No. 48



(j) Alleged Defaulter: refers to an officer, who is alleged
to have committed a breach of discipline.
(k) Prosecutor: refers to a Police Officer who has been
appointed to lead evidence at a Disciplinary
Tribunal.
3. It shall be the responsibility of the Head of the Division to:
(a) appoint Disciplinary Officer(s) in his Division;
(b) appoint Prosecutor(s) in his Division;
(c) open and maintain a register referred to as
“Disciplinary Charge Register” in which shall be
recorded:
(i) the date the Statement of Charge was
received by the officer;
(ii) name of the “Alleged Defaulter”;
(iii) offence(s) for which the alleged defaulter
was charged;
(iv) date of hearing;
(v) date of postponement;
(vi) results.
(d) Fix a date for hearing for the first sitting of a
Tribunal which should not be more than fourteen
(14) days after the Statement of Charge(s) has been
submitted to him.
(e) Make adequate arrangements to have all parties
including witnesses informed of the date of hearing.
(f) Sit as a Disciplinary Tribunal at least two days each
month to hear and determine delegated matters
referred to him.
(g) Ensure that hearings into disciplinary matters
which have to be postponed/adjourned as the case
may be are given definite dates of
postponements/adjournments which should not be
for periods in excess of fourteen (14) days.
Responsi-
bility of Head
of Division
6 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 48 Disciplinary Procedure and Complaints



(h) Submit, within seven (7) days, to the Officer in
charge of the Complaints Division, his findings in
the matter, punishment awarded and a copy of
the Statement of Charge, in accordance with the
specimen shown at Appendix “A”.
(i) Where verbal notice of appeal has been given by the
alleged defaulter, he shall submit within seven (7)
days a report of his findings, punishment awarded,
reason for his decision and the original documents of
the proceedings to the Officer in charge of the
Complaints Division.
(j) Where he has been informed by the Officer in charge
of the Complaints Division that an appeal has been
filed in a matter, he shall within seven (7) days of
such notification submit to the Officer in charge of
the Complaints Division a report of his findings,
punishment awarded, reason for his decision along
with the original documents of the proceedings.
(k) Submit by the seventh (7th) day of each month to the
Officer in charge of the Complaints Division a
monthly return of the names of officers and the
disciplinary charges preferred against them during
the preceding month.
(l) Submit by the seventh (7th) day after each quarter
to the Officer in charge of the Complaints Division, a
return showing all disciplinary charges that have
been completed by him during that quarter including
dismissals. Such returns shall be submitted as set
out in Appendix “A”.
(m) Submit to the Officer in charge of the Complaints
Division within forty-eight (48) hours any
delegated disciplinary matters referred to him.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 7
Disciplinary Procedure and Complaints S.O. No. 48



(n) Submit to the Officer in charge of the Complaints
Division, any disciplinary matter which has been
referred to him, where he is privy to the facts or for
any other reason which may make his adjudicating
in the matter prejudicial.
(o) Sign both original and duplicate notices for the
attendance of witnesses at his tribunal.
(p) Supply the Officer in charge of the Complaints
Division with any information, document, file or
return that he may request from time to time.
(q) File at his office the proceedings of all Disciplinary
Matters heard by him for a period of two years
except where an appeal in the matter is pending.
4. It shall be the responsibility of a Police Officer who has
detected a breach of discipline:
(a) in the case of an officer junior in rank to him, he
shall:
(i) prepare a warning notice for each allega-
tion in triplicate, in accordance with the
specimen shown at Appendix “B”;
(ii) serve the original of each warning notice on
the alleged defaulter;
(iii) request the alleged defaulter to sign and
place the date on the copies of the notice;
(iv) certify at the back of the duplicate and trip-
licate of the warning notice served on the
alleged defaulter and indicate on the
certificate whether:
(1) he refuses to accept;
(2) he accepts and refuses to sign;
(3) he accepts and signs;
(v) prepare a report setting out the brief facts
of the allegation;
(vi) attach the report to the duplicate and
submit it to the disciplinary officer;
8 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 48 Disciplinary Procedure and Complaints
Responsi-
bility of
Reporting
Officer



(vii) retain the triplicate for presentation,
should the disciplinary matter be referred
to a Tribunal;
(b) in the case of an officer senior in rank, he shall:
(i) report the allegation in writing to an
officer senior in rank to that of the alleged
defaulter;
(ii) such senior officer to whom the report at
paragraph (i) has been submitted, shall
adopt the procedure mentioned at para-
graph 4(a)(i)—(vii);
(iii) make an entry in the Station Diary subse-
quent to his serving a warning notice on an
alleged defaulter.
5. It shall be the responsibility of a Disciplinary Officer to:
(a) open and maintain a register known as “Warning
Notice Register” in which shall be entered the
following particulars:
(b) examine the warning notice, the report and any
other available facts to determine whether there is,
or not, sufficient evidence to substantiate a
disciplinary charge;
Responsibility
of
Disciplinary
Officer
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 9
Disciplinary Procedure and Complaints S.O. No. 48
Name of
Reporting
Officer Delegated Non-
delegated
Classification
RemarksAction
taken
Date of
allegation
Particu-
lars of
allegation
Station
to which
attached
Name of
alleged
offender



(c) where the evidence, discloses a non-delegated
offence, he shall submit the warning notice and
report with his recommendations to the Head of
Division for transmission to the Officer in charge of
the Complaints Division;
(d) where the evidence discloses a delegated offence and
he decides that the alleged defaulter should be
charged, he shall:
(i) prepare a “Statement of Charge” in tripli-
cate, Appendix “C”;
(ii) serve the alleged defaulter with the
original of each warning notice;
(iii) submit the duplicate “Statement of
Charge” to the Head of the Division and
obtain the name of the Prosecutor and a
date of hearing;
(iv) retain the triplicate for presentation at the
Tribunal;
(v) supply or make accessible to the alleged
defaulter at the time he is being served
with the “Statement of Charge”, any docu-
mentary evidence which is intended for use
against him at the Tribunal;
(vi) cite and serve all witnesses necessary for
the presentation of his matter at the
Tribunal on the prescribed form set out at
Appendix “D”;
(vii) handover to the Prosecutor in the
disciplinary matter within seven (7) days of
the first date of hearing, the relevant file
required for him to lead the  evidence;
10 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 48 Disciplinary Procedure and Complaints



(viii) make an entry in the Station Diary subse-
quent to serving the “Statement of Charge”
on an alleged defaulter;
(e) where the evidence does not disclose a
disciplinary offence, he shall inform the reporting
officer and the alleged defaulter in writing of his
decision.
6. It shall be the responsibility of a Tribunal Prosecutor to:
(a) obtain the file relevant to the presentation of a
disciplinary matter before the sitting of the Tribunal;
(b) study the file;
(c) liaise with the disciplinary officer to arrive at a
strategy for presentation of the matter at the
Tribunal;
(d) present the evidence at the Tribunal;
(e) prepare notices to warn all prosecution witnesses for
their appearances at Tribunal;
(f) report to the First Division Officer in charge of
Complaints Division the non-appearances of warned
witnesses.
7. An alleged defaulter has the, following rights:
(a) to cite witnesses in his own defence, (he can request
assistance from the Head of Division in this regard);
(b) to be represented at the Disciplinary Tribunal as
follows:
(i) Disciplinary Tribunal by Head of Division
by himself, a Police Officer of his choice, or
a member of his Staff Association;
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 11
Disciplinary Procedure and Complaints S.O. No. 48
Responsi-
bility of
Tribunal
Prosecutor
Rights of an
alleged
defaulter



(ii) A Disciplinary Tribunal convened by the
Police Service Commission and at the hear-
ing of an appeal at the Public Service
Appeal Board by an Attorney-at-law, him-
self, a Police Officer of his choice senior in
rank to him or a member of his Staff
Association;
(iii) to an appeal.
8. Police Officers attending Disciplinary Tribunals must be
attired in accordance with the instructions given at paragraphs 12
and 13 of Standing Order 6 “Attire and Appearance”.
9.  The proceedings before a Disciplinary Tribunal shall be held
in “private”. 
10. The procedure for hearing a Disciplinary Tribunal shall be
as follows:
(a) All evidence to be taken on oath.
(b) The prosecution witnesses are to be called first and
the opportunity given to the defence to cross-
examine these witnesses either by the alleged
defaulter or his aide.
(c) When a witness is cross-examined or re-examined
such evidence is to be taken in the form of questions
and answers.
(d) The standard of proof shall be on the “balance of
probabilities”.
(e) After the close of the prosecution’s case, if there is a
prima facie case made out against the alleged
defaulter, the defence shall be called upon to answer
the charge.
(f) The same procedure applies to the defence with
regards to cross-examination of witnesses, that is,
the prosecution be afforded the opportunity to cross-
examine the alleged defaulter or his witnesses after
they have given their “evidence-in-chief”.
12 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 48 Disciplinary Procedure and Complaints
Attire at
Tribunals
Tribunal
Proceeding to
be held in
private
Procedure for
hearing a
Disciplinary
Tribunal



(g) The Tribunal Officer, after hearing the evidence of
the prosecution, defence and all witnesses in the
matter, would then be required to “hand down” his
decision.
11.(1) Where an alleged defaulter is duly warned to attend a
Disciplinary Tribunal and he does not appear without good
reason, the hearing may be proceeded with and concluded by the
Tribunal in his absence.
(2) Where good reason is given to the Tribunal by, or on
behalf of the alleged defaulter, why such alleged defaulter is
unable to attend the hearing, the hearing shall be postponed or
adjourned as the case may be.
12. The Executive Officer in charge of  Service, Inspection and
Complaints, shall refer Disciplinary offences to Special Tribunals
in the following cases:
(a) where the head of a Division has indicated that he
was privy to the facts of a matter or for some other
reason, which may make his adjudication seem to be
prejudicial;
(b) where the Head of a Division has not been
appointed as a Standing Tribunal.
13. (1) The Special Tribunal appointed at paragraph 12 above,
shall comply with all instructions for the hearing of a Disciplinary
Tribunal as mentioned at paragraphs 9 and 10.
(2) On completion of the hearing, the Special Tribunal shall
submit, within forty-eight (48) hours, his findings and all notes of
evidence in the matter to the Officer in charge of the Complaints
Division.
14. A Police Officer who is aggrieved by the decision of a
Tribunal may within fourteen (14) days after the decision has
been communicated to him, file with the Secretary of the Public
Service Appeal Board, a Notice of Appeal in writing on the form
prescribed at Appendix “E”.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 13
Disciplinary Procedure and Complaints S.O. No. 48
Hearing in
the absence
of the alleged
defaulter
Appointment
of Special
Tribunal
Responsi-
bility of the
Special
Tribunal
Appointed
Procedure for
Appeals



15. It shall be the responsibility of the Officer in charge of the
Complaints Division to do the following:
(a) maintain such files and registers as are necessary
for the recording of criminal/disciplinary action
taken against:
(i) members of the Service, the classification
of the offence, the status of the charge
including final results;
(ii) the submission of returns in connection
with disciplinary matters to the Service
Commission;
(b) request from officers in charge of Divisions, any
document, files or returns in connection with any
criminal/disciplinary matter that may become
necessary from time to time;
(c) where a notification has been received from the
Secretary of the Public Service Appeal Board, that a
Police Officer has appealed against the decision of a
Disciplinary Tribunal, he shall:
(i) request from the Head of the Division
concerned, the original documents of the
Tribunal proceedings;
(ii) upon receipt of the documents mentioned
at (i) above, prepare six (6) copies, five (5) of
which shall be sent to the Secretary of the
Public Service Appeal Board and the other
kept for use by the officer appointed to
present the matter at the Public Service
Appeal Board;
(iii) supply to the Service Commissions
Department, all such information and
returns required by them in relation to
disciplinary/criminal charges; 
(iv) upon receipt of a complaint which discloses
a non-delegated offence against a Police
Officer, refer such complaint to the
Executive Officer in charge of Service,
Inspection and Complaints;
14 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 48 Disciplinary Procedure and Complaints
Responsi-
bility of First
Division
Officer in
charge of
Complaints
Division



(d) on receipt of the results of criminal proceedings
against a Police Officer, he shall:
(i) apply to the relevant court for a copy of the
decision;
(ii) inform the Executive Officer responsible
for Service, Inspection and Complaints of
the results mentioned above;
(iii) submit a copy of the case results to the
Police Service Commission through the
Executive Officer responsible for Service,
Inspection and Complaints for their
decision in the matter.
16. The Executive Officer responsible for the supervision of the
Complaints Division, on receipt of the allegation mentioned at
paragraph 15 (d)(iii) and 15 (c)(iv), shall comply with the
provisions of Regulation 84(1) of the Police Service Commission
Regulations, Chap. 1:01.
17. (1) Police Officers suspended/interdicted from duty shall
cease to perform the function of his office forthwith.
(2) Upon receipt of the Notice of Suspension/Interdiction,
he shall hand over to the officer serving the Notice of
Suspension/Interdiction, all items of uniform, Police
Identification Card, Firearm and Ammunition, if issued and any
other item issued to him for the performance of his duty.
(3) A suspended/interdicted officer shall:
(a) inform the Officer in charge of the Service Inspection
and Complaints Unit immediately of any change of
address;
(b) furnish the Officer in charge of the Complaints
Division, if he is away from the given address for a
period exceeding two (2) weeks with an address at
which he can be readily contacted, indicating the
anticipated period of time he will be at that address;
Responsi-
bility of the
Executive
Officer
Suspension/
Interdiction
from Duty
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 15
Disciplinary Procedure and Complaints S.O. No. 48



(c) proceed out of the country only with the written
approval of the Commissioner of Police.
(4) Notwithstanding:
(a) The instructions at paragraph 17(3)(a) —(c) shall not
supersede those given to a Police Officer by the
Director of Personnel Administration when he is
served with a Notice of Suspension/Interdiction.
(b) Sub-paragraph (i); a Police Officer suspended/inter-
dicted shall attend disciplinary tribunals and any
court of competent jurisdiction in which he is either
a complainant or a witness.
18. The Police Officer detailed to serve a Notice of Suspension/
Interdiction on a Police Officer shall:
(a) collect all items of uniform, Police Identification
Card, Firearm and Ammunition issued and any
other item issued to the Police Officer;
(b) prepare an inventory in triplicate of items received,
which must be signed by him and the officer from
whom the items have been retrieved;
(c) deliver the original to the suspended/interdicted
officer;
(d) submit the items of kit to the Officer in charge of the
Quarter Master Stores along with the duplicate of
the inventory;
(e) retain the triplicate of the inventory;
(f) return to the Officer in charge of the Armoury, any
firearm and ammunition seized/received and obtain
a receipt thereof.
Duty of  the
Officer
serving notice
of suspension/
interdiction
16 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 48 Disciplinary Procedure and Complaints



19. (1) The Officer in charge of the Complaints Division, on
receipt of the findings of a Disciplinary Tribunal, where punish-
ment has been awarded and after fourteen (14) days, no appeal
has been lodged or on the determination of an appeal where a
conviction has been affirmed, shall supply sufficient information
of the conviction to:
(a) the Officer in charge of Finance Branch who shall
make the necessary deduction from the “defaulting”
officer’s salary;
(b) the Officer in charge of Administration Branch, who
shall cause publication of the conviction in the
Departmental Orders and an entry made on the
original Conduct Sheet of the defaulting officer.
(2) Upon the publication of the punishment awarded to the
defaulting officer in the Departmental Orders, the following
action must be taken:
(a) the Officer in charge of the Division/Branch/Section
Unit to which the “defaulter” is attached, shall
record the conviction on the “Conduct Sheet” in that
officer’s Divisional Personal File;
(b) the Second Division Officer in charge of the Station/
Office to which the “defaulter” is attached, shall
record the conviction on the defaulting officer’s
“Conduct Sheet” kept at that Station/Office.
PART II
P
ROCEDURE FOR COMPLAINTS AGAINST POLICE OFFICER
20. “Authority” refers to the “Police Complaints Authority”
established under section 4 of the Police Complaints Authority
Act, No. 17 of 1993.
21. “Complaints Division” refers to a unit of the Police Service
established in accordance with section 20 of the Police Complaints
Authority Act, No. 17 of 1993.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 17
Disciplinary Procedure and Complaints S.O. No. 48
Publication
and recording
of penalties
Authority
Section 3
Complaints
Division
section 20



22. “Complainant” in this Standing Order refers to a member of
the public who makes a complaint against a Police Officer.
23. “Certified Copy” refers to a copy of the complaint which is
signed by the person making the complaint and on which an
official stamp marked “CERTIFIED” as shown at Appendix “F” is
imposed.
24. The “Complaints Division” hereinafter referred to, as the
“Division” is mainly responsible for receiving, recording and
investigating complaints from members of the public made
against Police Officers.
25. (1) It shall be the responsibility of the Second Division
Officer in charge of Station/Branch/Section/Office to open and
maintain a register known as the “Complaints Register” for
recording all complaints made by members of the public against
Police Officers.
(2) The Complaints Register shall be:
(a) drawn up in accordance with the specimen shown at
Appendix “G” of this Order;
(b) kept under the control of the Second Division Officer
in charge of Station/Branch/Section/Office;
(c) recorded in the official “Handover” when handing
over a Station/Branch/Section/Office.
(3) The Officer in charge of the “Division” shall open and
maintain such registers as may be necessary for the recording of:
(a) complaints received;
(b) complaints investigated;
(c) movements of files;
(d) final decisions taken in the matters reported.
26. (1) Complaints can be made against any Police Officer at
any of the following places:
(a) Police Station/Branch/Section/Office;
18 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 48 Disciplinary Procedure and Complaints
Complainant
section 3
Certified
Copy
section 21(4)
Main respon-
sibility of the
Complaints
Division 
Section 20(4)
Manner of
making
complaints



(b) Complaints Division;
(c) Complaints Authority.
(2) All complaints shall be made in writing by the
complainant himself to the Officer in charge of
Station/Branch/Section/Office on the prescribed form, a copy of
which is attached at Appendix “H”.
(3) On no account must Police Officers record the facts of
the complaint in the Station Diary or on the prescribed form.
[Section 21(i)].
27. (1) It shall be the responsibility of the officer in charge of
Finance Branch to provide each Station/ Branch/Section/ Office
with a certified stamp and an adequate supply of prescribed forms
as shown at Appendix “H”.
(2) The Second Division Officer in charge of Station/
Branch/Section/Office shall keep the official stamp marked
“CERTIFIED” under his control.
28. (1) Police Officers attached to the “Division” shall be
required to take an Oath of Secrecy.
(2) An officer of the First Division appointed to investigate
complaint is required to take an Oath of Secrecy.
29. Police Officers shall regard as secret and confidential all
documents information or matters discussed in the processing and
investigation of a complaint. In addition, they are to make them-
selves conversant with the provisions set out in sections 38 to 40
of the Police Complaints Authority Act, No. 17 of 1993.
30. A Police Officer other than the Second Division Officer in
charge of Station/Branch/Section/Office to whom a complaint
against a Police Officer has been made shall refer such com-
plainant to the Second Division Officer in charge of
Station/Branch/Section/Office.
Issue of
Certified
Stamp and
Prescribed
Form
Oath of
Secrecy
Complaints to
be treated as
secret and
confidential
Complaints to
Officer other
than Second
Division
Officer in
charge
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 19
Disciplinary Procedure and Complaints S.O. No. 48



31. The Second Division Officer in charge of
Station/Branch/Section/Office to whom a complaint has been
made shall do the following:
(a) ensure that an entry of the complainant’s arrival is
recorded in the Station Diary without mentioning
the complaint;
(b) deliver to the complainant sufficient forms as are
necessary to enable the complainant to record his
report in duplicate;
(c) retrieve the form(s) with the written complaint(s);
(d) (i) certify both copies of the complaint by affixing
the official stamp in the space provided beneath
the signature of the complainant;
(ii) fill in the relevant information required in the
stamp;
(e) give the complainant a certified copy of his
complaint;
(f) ensure that the departure of the complainant is
recorded in the Station Diary;
(g) send the original certified complaint form to the
Officer in charge of the “Division” under confidential
cover within twenty-four (24) hours of the receipt of
the complaint;
(h) record an entry in the “Complaints Register”:
(i) in the “Action Taken” column where the
duplicate was handed to the complainant;
(ii) in the column provided, the date and time
the original complaint was sent to the
“Division”;
(i) take any steps which appear to be desirable for the
purpose of obtaining or securing any evidence as
relates to a complaint.
Responsibility
of Second
Division
Officer in
charge
section 21
20 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 48 Disciplinary Procedure and Complaints



32. The Officer in charge of the “Division”, on receipt of a
complaint shall do the following:
(a) record such complaint in the register for that
purpose;
(b) detail an investigator to enquire into the
complaint;
(c) submit a copy of all complaints to the Authority;
(d) submit to the Director of Public Prosecutions a copy
of the complaint where such complaint relates to a
fatality or alleged criminal conduct;
(e) furnish the Authority with a copy of the report on the
complaint within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the
complaint along with a summary of the investiga-
tions to date;
(f) submit further reports to the Authority on a
monthly basis during the course of investigation;
(g) submit to the Authority and the Commissioner of
Police:
(i) monthly progress reports on investigations
undertaken by the “Division”;
(ii) final reports on all investigations.
33. The Officer in charge of the “Division” shall, during or after
an investigation into a complaint, if he is of the view that the
complaint is of a frivolous nature, discontinue the investigation
and inform the undermentioned of his decision—
(a) The Commissioner of Police.
(b) The Authority.
(c) The Police Officer against whom the complaint was
made.
(d) The Complainant.
34. The Officer in charge of the “Division”, on receipt of instruc-
tions in writing from the Authority to continue an investigation
disposed of under paragraph 33 above, shall carry out such
investigation in the manner set out for investigating a complaint.
Duties of the
Officer in
charge of the
devision
Section 21
Section 25
Frivolous
Complaints
section 23
Re:
Investigation
of Frivolous
Complaints
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 21
Disciplinary Procedure and Complaints S.O. No. 48



35. A Police Officer detailed to investigate a complaint shall,
within fourteen (14) days thereafter, submit a full report of his
findings along with all relevant documents, and his recommenda-
tion to the Officer in charge of the “Division”.
36. The Officer in charge of a Division/Branch/Section is
required to assist investigators of complaints and ensure that the
investigation is not hindered in any way.
37. Police Officers shall not obstruct or cause any hindrance to
investigator when discharging his duties under this Order.
38. The Police Complaints Authority in pursuant of a
complaint is empowered to request:
(a) the presence of any Police Officer before it;
(b) any information, document or thing from any Police
Officer/Station/Office.
39. Police Officers summoned before the Authority shall:
(a) proceed promptly on the date, time and place as
instructed;
(b) when appearing, dress themselves in accordance
with the manner prescribed for attendance at
Disciplinary Tribunal in Standing Order 6 “Attire
and Appearance”.
Submission of
Findings by
Investigator
Instructions
to the Officer
in charge of
Division/
Branch/
Section
Obstructing
an
Investigator
Power of the
Authority
Section 6
Police
Officers
Summoned
before the
Authority
22 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 48 Disciplinary Procedure and Complaints



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 23
Disciplinary Procedure and Complaints S.O. No. 48




24 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 48 Disciplinary Procedure and Complaints




TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 25
Disciplinary Procedure and Complaints S.O. No. 48




26 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 48 Disciplinary Procedure and Complaints




TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 27
Disciplinary Procedure and Complaints S.O. No. 48




28 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 48 Disciplinary Procedure and Complaints




TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 29
Disciplinary Procedure and Complaints S.O. No. 48




30 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 48 Disciplinary Procedure and Complaints
