TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
STANDING  ORDERS  42
INDUSTRIAL (AND OTHER RELATED )  ACCIDENTS



Industrial (and other related) Accidents
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
SECTION
1. Industrial Accidents
2. Other Related Accidents
PART  I
INDUSTRIAL ACCIDENT
3. Responsibility of Police Officers receiving a Report
4. Duty of the First Division Officer-in-charge of a Division
5. Duties of the Investigator
PART  II
A
IRCRAFT ACCIDENT
6. Aircraft Accident or Distress
7. Responsibility of Police Officers receiving a Report
8. Responsibility of the First Division Officer-in-charge of a Station
9. Guidelines to Police Officers
PART  III
S
HIPWRECK AND SALVAGE
10. Duties of a Police Officer
11. Authority to appoint Receiver
PART  IV
PROCEDURE TO BE ADOPTED WHEN DEALING WITH OIL SPILL POLLUTION
12. Oil Pollution
13. Responsibility of the First Division Officer-in-charge of a Station
14. Police Officers Investigating Oil Spill/Pollution
15. Special request for Early Analysis and Hearing
16. Prosecution
17. Occurrence Recorded
18. Duty of the Investigator
SCHEDULE
2 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 42 Industrial (and other related) Accidents



1. “Industrial Accidents” refers to occurrences in any Industrial
or Commercial Enterprise, resulting in the loss of life, injury to
persons or damage to property, plant and machinery.
2. “Other Related Accidents” in this Standing Order, refers to
accidents involving aircraft, shipwreck and explosives.
PART  I
I
NDUSTRIAL ACCIDENT
3. (1) The Police Officer, on receipt of a report of an industrial
accident shall—
(a) record the information;
(b) inform his immediate senior.
(2) The senior officer, on receipt of the information above,
shall—
(a) cause initial enquiries to be made; and
(b) where necessary, inform—
1. the Officer in charge of the Division;
2. the Officer in charge of the Fire Station in the
District;
3. the Senior Factory Inspectorate and in the
case of Oil Field accidents, the Chief
Petroleum Engineer.
4. The First Division Officer in charge of a Division on receipt
of the information at paragraph (3) above shall immediately
inform the executive Officer in charge of his area.
5. The officer investigating the accident shall—
(a) interview persons to ascertain the following:
(i) time of the accident;
(ii) name and address of owner/tenant;
(iii) events that led to the accident 
(iv) names and addresses of victims;
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 3
Industrial (and other related) Accidents S.O. No. 42
Industrial
Accidents
Other Related
Accidents
Responsibility
of Police
Officers
receiving a
Report
Duty of the
First Division
Officer in
charge of a
Division
Duties of the
Investigator



(v) value of property damaged or destroyed;
(vi) particulars of insurance;
(vii) any other information that is relevant to
the enquiry;
(b) request the services of a police photographer;
(c) record statements;
(d) submit an interim report to the Officer in charge of
the Division;
(e) record in the Occurrence Register, the facts
surrounding the accident and action taken within
forty-eight (48) hours of the report;
(f) submit a final report along with statements and
other relevant documents pertaining to the
accident to the Officer in charge of the Division
within twenty-one (21) days of the report.
PART II
A
IRCRAFT ACCIDENT
6. Whenever an aircraft is reported in distress or has crashed in
Trinidad and Tobago, such report shall contain the information
following:
(a) type and description of aircraft (military, civil, light,
medium, jumbo, propeller, jet);
(b) the nature of distress;
(c) location of the aircraft or wreckage and number of
persons therein if any;
(d) the time the crash or distress occurred;
(e) the action already taken, including known factors
which may impede rescue service or which require
special attention;
(f) the name and address of the person reporting the
crash or distress.
4 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 42 Industrial (and other related) Accidents
Aircraft
Accident or
Distress



7. The Police Officer, on receipt of the information above shall—
(a) record the information obtained at paragraph 6
above;
(b) communicate such information immediately to—
(i) the Second Division Officer-in-charge of
the Station;
(ii) the Director of Civil Aviation;
(iii) the Air Traffic Control Centre; or
(iv) the Aerodrome Control Tower;
(c) in addition, if the crash occurred at the sea or on a
beach, the Director of Maritime Services shall be
informed so that a “Receiver of Wrecks” may be sent
to take charge of the incident.
8. The Second Division Officer in charge of a Station, after
being informed of the information at paragraph 7 shall—
(a) inform the area First Division officer;
(b) inform the Air Traffic Control Centre;
(c) request assistance from other services, e.g., Fire,
District Medical Officer, Hospital, Undertakers,
Police Photographers, Customs and Immigration;
(d) detail an adequate strength to—
(i) engage in rescue operation;
(ii) protect property and equipment;
(iii) engage in crowd and traffic controls;
(iv) detail an officer to make enquiries.
9. Police officers engaged in rescue operations, protecting
property and crowd control shall observe the following guidelines:
(a) approach the scene from, upwind and if possible,
uphill position:
(b) keep the wind at your back and your feet out of
spilled fuel;
Responsibility
of Police
Officers
receiving a
Report
Responsibility
of the First
Division
Officer-in-
charge of a
Station
Guidelines to
Police
Officers
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 5
ndustrial (and other related) Accidents S.O. No. 42



(c) stay uphill at all times, if possible;
(d) seal off an extensive area surrounding the scene of
the crash or disaster;
(e) locate the exit point from the aircraft and if the
cabin crew is conscious, leave evacuation to them, if
not, assist in evacuation;
(f) keep onlookers as far as possible from the aircraft
and in an uphill, upwind position;
(g) prohibit smoking by survivors, rescuers and
onlookers;
(h) prohibit the removal of any part of the crash
aircraft, except by investigators;
(i) where the crash occurs in a residential area, advise
the residents to do the following:
(i) shut all doors of their premises and remove
any curtain material that could spread fire
in the event of an explosion;
(ii) turn off gas and electricity at the mains
and switch off all machinery;
(iii) extinguish any existing fire, whether
internal or external;
(iv) refrain from smoking or striking matches;
(v) evacuate the building, if necessary, by
doors and windows on the opposite side of
the building from the crash;
(j) notwithstanding the guidelines mentioned, Police
Officers are required to observe the principles
stated in the Schedule hereto.
6 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 42 Industrial (and other related) Accidents



PART  III
SHIPWRECK AND SALVAGE
10. When it is brought to the attention of the police that any
ship or aircraft is wrecked at sea or any goods are washed ashore,
the senior Police Officer at the Station in whose district the
incident(s) occurred, shall do the following:
(a) immediately inform the Director of Maritime
Services in order that a “Receiver of Wrecks” may be
sent to take charge of the incident;
(b) take such action as may be necessary to protect life
and property until the arrival of the “Receiver of
Wrecks”.
11. (1) The Minister responsible for Shipping may designate
any person to be a “Receiver of Wrecks” in any specified area.
(2) Where a Police Officer is appointed a “Receiver of
Wrecks” under the Shipping Act, No. 24/1978, he shall be guided
by Part XVI of the said Act in the performance of his functions.
PART  IV
P
ROCEDURE TO BE ADOPTED WHEN DEALING WITH
OIL SPILL POLLUTION
12. “Oil Pollution” refers to the discharge or escape of oil from
any vessel into the territorial waters of Trinidad and Tobago.
13. On receipt of a report of oil spill/pollution, the Second
Division Officer-in-charge of the Station in whose District the
spillage occurred, shall—
(a) inform the Institute of Marine Affairs;
(b) inform the Director of Maritime Services;
(c) inform the Officer in charge of his Division;
(d) appoint an investigator.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 7
Industrial (and other related) Accidents S.O. No. 42
Duties of a
Police Officer
Authority to
appoint
Receiver
Oil Pollution
Responsi-
bility of the
First Division
Officer-in-
charge of a
Station



14. (1) Police Officers detailed to investigate oil spill/pollution
shall be conversant with the provisions of the Oil Pollution of
Territorial Waters Act, Chap. 37:03.
(2) In addition, he shall be guided by the instructions
recorded hereunder—
(a) Containers: It is important that the right type of
containers be used for gathering samples.
Containers such as glass jars for food are the best for
taking samples. Wherever the spill forms a skin on the
water, a bucket can be used to good effect. Other
methods for taking samples are a polyfoam sheet or a
polythene sheet.
(b) Procedure for taking samples:
(i) Visit scene as early as possible and take
samples, e.g., surface of the sea, beach,
etc.
(ii) Identify the source of spillage and take
samples from it, e.g., vessels at sea or
wreck, etc.
(iii) Collect adequate amount of sample—
Crude Oil—1 quart, Oil in water emul-
sion—5 quarts
(iv) Call in photographer if necessary.
(v) In the case of an oiled beach, a careful
and detailed examination must be made
to determine the uniformity of the oil
deposit. In particular, if there is any tarry
semi-solid lumps or wet tarry patches,
their presence should be recorded and
some idea of their extent obtained.
(vi) Collect seaweed, small pieces of wood
and/or cloth to which oil is adhered and
place into the container.
Police
Officers
Investigating
Oil Spill/
Pollution
8 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 42 Industrial (and other related) Accidents



(vii) Scrape off tarry substances from large
pieces of wood, stones or other surfaces
which cannot be placed in the container.
(viii) Where the oil has soaked into the sand, a
shovel can be used to collect this sample
and place it in a large container.
(ix) Samples taken from different locations
shall be placed in separate containers
and labelled independently.
(c) Labelling of samples: All samples shall be
properly labelled and contain the following informa-
tion:
(i) Ownership of samples.
(ii) Description of sample, e.g., heavy, light,
tarry.
(iii) Location from which sample was taken,
e.g., surface, beach, vessel, etc.
(iv) Identification number or code.
(v) Date and time sample was taken.
(vi) Reference to any written or photographic
records.
(d) Information to be supplied along with
samples:
It must be emphasised that the taking of samples is
useless unless detailed information about them is
provided. Such information should be in duplicate—
one sent to the Forensic Science Centre and the
other kept as record.
Information should include—
(i) Department—Police.
(ii) Description—e.g., Black substance, black
lumps.
(iii) Position from which sample was taken—
Eastern end of Chagville.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 9
Industrial (and other related) Accidents S.O. No. 42



(iv) Identification number or sample or code.
(v) Date and Time.
(vi) Method of sampling—Equipment used.
(vii) Particulars of photographs taken—
Technique used.
(viii) Name of person taking sample from the
scene—No., Rank, Name of personnel.
(ix) Purpose for taking sample—Testing.
(x) Action taken on sample—Despatch to the
Forensic Science Centre, including No.,
Rank and Name of conveying officer.
(xi) Any other relevant information such as
reference to dispersants used, or if
sample is to be compared with sample
from suspected source, weather
conditions.
15. Due to the immediacy of the matter the Officer in charge
shall—
(a) request from the Director of the Forensic Science
Centre an immediate analysis of the sample(s)
submitted;
(b) seek an early trial where prosecution is instituted.
16. In order to prevent prosecution by more than one department
for the same violation, the Officer in charge of the Division shall
consult the Heads of the Departments referred to at section 4(4) of the
Oil Pollution of Territorial Waters Act, Chap. 37:03.
17. In cases of all Industrial Accidents covered by this Standing
Order, where legal proceedings have not been instituted, the
matters shall be recorded and dealt with as an “Occurrence”.
Special
request for
early analysis
and hearing
Prosecution
Occurrence
recorded
10 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 42 Industrial (and other related) Accidents



18. It shall be the duty of the investigator at the scene of an air
crash, shipwreck or emergency landing of an aircraft/vessel to:
(a) liaise with the Civil Authorities investigating the
crash, shipwreck or emergency landing to deter-
mine—
(i) number of passengers, names and
addresses, sex age, ethnicity, and
nationality;
(ii) number of persons injured, survived or
deceased;
(iii) in the case of the injured persons, the
name of the institution in which they are
hospitalised;
(iv) cause of the crash, shipwreck or emer-
gency landing;
(b) submit an interim report to the Officer in charge of
the Division within twenty-four (24) hours;
(c) interview and record statements from survivors and
eye witnesses;
(d) witness all post mortems;
(e) enter the crash, shipwreck or emergency landing in
the Occurrence Register at Station;
(f) proceed with the guidelines as laid down for the
investigation of an “occurrence” and the submission
of file for a Coroner’s Inquest.
SCHEDULE
GENERAL GUIDANCE  IN  RESCUE  OPERATION
1. Effect a rescue as quickly as possible, even though it may
appear that there is no immediate danger. There will be fuel about
and fire quickly spreads through a crashed aircraft.
2. Do not waste time trying to enter by other than a marked
“rescue point”. Emergency windows, hatches and break-in points
are there to be used. Other parts of the aircraft are of a very
strong structure and will resist assault even with sharp and heavy
instruments.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 11
Industrial (and other related) Accidents S.O. No. 42
Duty of the
Investigator



3. If possible, effect entry on the side opposite to that which is
affected by fire. Remember that the people inside are to be ev acu-
ated.
4. Read the instructions on escape hatches carefully. It
only takes a few seconds. If the hatch is primed with any type of
explosive charge to assist removal, this will be stated.
5. Before removing the pilot from a military aircraft, you
should—
(a) read carefully and follow to the letter marked
instructions; 
(b) remove the canopy; and
(c) read the instructions on the fuselage. It will tell you
whether an  ejection seat is fitted and will indicate
the correct means of access to the craft, both in
normal circumstances and in an emergency.
6. If the crew is conscious, carefully follow the instructions
given by them.
7. When an unconscious person has been removed from a
military aircraft, detach oxygen mask, parachute, harness and
any life support and radio equipment. Any helmet worn should be
left on.
8. When guarding military aircraft wreckage, do not stay in
close proximity to or tamper with damaged technical equipment
as you may be injured or expose yourself to radiation.
9. When guarding a civil aircraft, the wreckage should not be
touched or interfered with, except so far as may be necessary—
(a) for the rescue of persons and animals;
(b) to prevent danger or obstruction to the police or to
air or surface aircraft;
(c) to prevent destruction by fire;
(d) for the removal of mail, goods and passengers’
baggage under police supervision.
12 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 42 Industrial (and other related) Accidents