TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
STANDING ORDERS  47
WOMEN POLICE BUREAU



Women Police Bureau
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
SECTION
1. Establishment
2. Bureau Supervisor
3. Women Police Affairs Desk
4. Woman Police Affairs Unit
5. Responsibility of Bureau Supervisor
6. Responsibility of Unit Manager
7. Responsibility of Desk Manager
8. Responsibility of Division/Branch Officer in charge
9. Rest Room and Toilet Facilities
10. Duties of Women Police Officers
11. Dress Code
2 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 47 Women Police Bureau



1. Their is established a Bureau to be known as the Women Police
Bureau.
2. (1) The Bureau shall be supervised by the most Senior Woman
Police Officer in the Police Service in addition to her normal duties as
Police Officer.
(2) The most Senior Woman Police Officer shall be assisted in the
management of the Bureau by other Senior Women Police Officers in
order of seniority.
3. (1) There is established a Woman Police Affairs Desk located at the
Administration Building in the office of the Planning and Development
Unit.
(2) The Senior Woman Police Officer in the service or any Woman
Police Officer, as she may from time to time delegate, shall manage the
desk.
4. (1) There is established in each Division/Branch, a Woman Police
Affairs Unit.
(2) The most Senior Woman Police Officer attached to a
Division/Branch shall be responsible for the management of the Unit in
addition to her normal police duties.
5. The Bureau Supervisor shall—
(a) meet with all Unit Managers on a specified day, at least
once per month;
(b) meet with all Women Police Officers at least once per
quarter;
(c) meet with the Commissioner on a specified date at least
once per month. A delegation of not more than five (5)
women police officers can sit at this meeting;
(d) liaise with the Officer in Charge of Finance Branch in
matters peculiar to Women Police Welfare;
(e) visit stations and sections to determine whether Women
Police Officers facilities are being maintained.
6. The Unit Manager shall—
(a) open and maintain a Women Police Lecture/Discussion
Register at her Unit;
Establishment
Bureau
Supervisor
Women Police
Affairs Desk
Woman Police
Affairs Unit
Responsibility
of Bureau
Supervisor
Responsibility
of Unit
Manager
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 3
Women Police Bureau S.O. No. 47



(b) cause to be recorded in the Register, all topics
discussed at these lectures;
(c) produce the Register at the end of each lecture to
Head of Division for his perusal and signature;
(d) cause issues raised at the Lecture/Discussion to be
transmitted to the Women Police Affairs Desk.
7. The Desk Manager shall—
(a) submit to the Bureau Supervisor, all written corre-
spondence;
(b) ensure that there is a Woman Police Officer daily at
the desk;
(c) set dates for meetings on the advice of the Bureau
Supervisor;
(e) liaise with all Unit Managers.
8. The Officer-in-Charge of a Division/Branch shall ensure that
Female Officers attached to his Division/Branch are made
available to perform on a daily basis the functions mentioned
hereunder:
(a) searching of female prisoners and their personal
effects;
(b) interviewing and recording reports and statements
from females and children who are the victims of
sexual offences or other crimes of violence;
(c) accompanying victims of sexual offences or other
crimes of violence for medical attention and to the
scene of the crime;
(d) investigating offences involving children and
younger persons, in cases where specialised female
consideration are required;
(e) patrolling specifically the areas of schools and other
places frequented by children and young persons;
(f) escorting children and young persons in custody to
and from courts, orphanages and industrial schools
and abused children to and from a place of safety;
(g) taking part in raids and searches where women and
children are likely to be.
Responsibility
of Desk
Manager
Responsibility
of the Officer
in Charge of
Division/
Branch
4 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 47 Women Police Bureau



9. (1) The First Division Officer in Charge of a Division/Branch
shall ensure that there are rest rooms and toilet facilities
provided for female officers separate from those assigned to male
police officers at each Police Building where female officers are
attached.
(2) Restrooms and toilet facilities provided at paragraph (1)
above, shall be used exclusively by female officers.
(3) Female Police Officers are to ensure that the restroom
and toilet facilities provided for them are kept clean and tidy at all
times.
10. Women Police Officers shall—
(a) adhere to all Laws and Regulations governing Police
Officers generally and Women Police Officers in
particular;
(b) attend all Lectures/Discussions called to deal with
women issues;
(c) perform the functions assigned to them;
(d) ensure that the Bureau functions effectively by
participating in all its activities;
(e) adhere to the Code of Dress for Women Police
Officers.
11. Code of Dress:
(a) Women Police Officers whether in uniform or not,
shall—
(i) adhere firmly to the requirements of S.O. 6
Attire and Appearance;
(ii) refrain from attending at Police Buildings
in clothing which exposes the body in a
sexually gratifying manner;
(iii) desist from engaging in the act of “Body
Piercing”.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 5
Women Police Bureau S.O. No. 47
Rest Room
and Toilet
Facilities
Duties of
Women Police
Officers
Dress Code