TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
STANDING  ORDERS  45
CIVILIAN EMPLOYEES



Civilian Employees
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
SECTION
1. Civilian Employees
2. Administrative Control
3. Keeping of a Register
4. Issue of Identification Pass
5. Loss of Identification Pass
6. Return on completion of attachment
7. Hours of Work
8. Application for Leave
9. Misconduct of Civilian Employees
2 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 45 Civilian Employees



1. “Civilian Employees” refer to persons other than Police
Officers employed by the Government of Trinidad and Tobago to
perform specific duties on a full time basis in the Police Service.
2. Civilian Employees attached to the Police Service are under
the Administrative Control of the Commissioner of Police.
3. (1) The Officer in charge of a Division/Branch/Section to
which civilian employees are attached, shall open and keep a
register known as the “Civilian Employee Attendance Register”
for recording the arrival and departure of each civilian employee.
(2) The register shall be drawn up in accordance with the
specimen as shown at Appendix “A”.
(a) each day shall be headed with the day and date in
red ink;
(b) the civilian employee shall enter his/her arrival and
departure and affix his/her signature in the columns
provided in the register.
4. (1) The Officer in charge of Administration Branch shall
within fourteen (14) days of attachment of a civilian employee,
issue him/her with a Trinidad and Tobago Police Service
“Identification Picture”.
(2) The civilian employee shall wear such identification pass
during his/her tour of duty on the front upper portion of his/her
clothing in order that it can be easily seen.
5. (1) Civilian employees shall on the loss of the Police
Identification Pass, immediately report such loss in writing to the
officer in charge of the Division/Branch to which they are
attached.
(2) Where it is determined that the loss is through
negligence, the civilian employee shall be made to pay the cost of
replacing the identification pass.
Civilian
Employees
Administra-
tive Control
Keeping of a
Register
Issue of
Identification
Pass
Loss of
Identification
Pass
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 3
Civilian Employees S.O. No. 45



6. Civilian employees shall, on the conclusion of their attach-
ment to the Police Service, return the Identification Pass to the
officer in charge of the Division/Branch to which they were
attached.
7. Except where the exigencies of the Service demand, civilian
employees are normally required to work from 8:00 a.m. to 4:15
p.m. Monday to Thursday and from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on
Friday.
8. (1) Civilian employees when applying for leave shall do so in
writing.
(2) Such application shall be addressed to the Officer
in charge of the Division/Branch/Section to which they are
assigned.
(3) The Officer in charge of the Division/Branch/Section shall,
on receipt of the application, forward it to the Officer in charge of
Administration Branch with his recommendation and request for
replacement where necessary.
9. (1) Where a civilian employee commits an act of misconduct,
the officer detecting such act shall submit a report to the Officer
in charge of the Division/Branch/Section to which the employee is
assigned.
(2) The Officer in charge of the Division/Branch/Section, on
receipt of the report of misconduct shall transmit such report with
his recommendation to the Officer in charge of Administration
Branch.
(3) The Officer in charge of Administration Branch. on receipt
of the report and recommendation, shall send it to the Civilian
Administrative Officer (A.O II) supervising the employee who
shall comply with the procedure set but for discipline under the
Public Service Commission Regulation, Chapt. 1:01.
4 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 45 Civilian Employees
Return on
completion of
attachment
Hours of
Work
Application
for Leave
Misconduct of
Civilian
Employees