TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
STANDING  ORDERS  40
FIREARMS AND AMMUNITION



Firearms and Ammunition
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
SECTION
1. Firearm User’s Licence
2. Firearm User’s (Employee’s) Certificate
3. Firearm Registers
4. Persons who may be issued with a Firearm User’s Licence/Firearm User’s
(Employee’s) Certificate
5. Application for grant of Licences, Certificates or Permits
6. Responsibility of Officer in charge of a Division on receipt of an Application
7. Responsibility of the Second Division Officer in charge of Station
8. Firearm User’s (Employee’s) Certificate
9. Submission of File to Commissioner of Police
10. Approval of Application and issue of Firearm User’s Licence
11. Authorised Officers
12. Guidelines to Officers Collecting Appropriate Fees
13. Responsibility of the Officer in charge of the Division re an indecipherable
Serial Number
14. Responsibility of the Assistant Commissioner, Training re an indecipher-
able Serial Number
15. Submission of Return re Non-payment of Fees and Investigation
16. Conditions for Seizure of Firearms and Ammunition
17. Procedure for dealing with Seized and Surrendered Firearms
18. Lost or Stolen Firearms
19. Variation of Firearm User’s Licence/Firearm User’s (Employee’s)
Certificate
2 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 40 Firearms and Ammunition



1. “Firearm User’s Licence” refers to a licence issued by the
Commissioner of Police authorising the holder thereof, subject to
the terms and conditions specified in the Licence, to be in
possession of the firearm and ammunition so specified.
2. “Firearm User’s (Employee’s) Certificate” refers to a certifi-
cate issued by the Commissioner authorising the person to whom
it is issued, to keep, carry and use in connection with the business
of the holder of such Firearm User’s Licence, the particular
firearm specified in such certificate and such ammunition thereof
as may be so specified.
3. (1) The First Division Officer in charge of a Division shall
cause a register to be opened and kept at the Divisional Office for
the purpose of recording the movement of all firearm files.
(2) The Second Division Officer in charge of a Station shall
open and maintain—
(a) Firearm User’s Licence Register (F.U.L.).
(b) Firearm User’s (Employee’s) Certificate Register
(F.U.E.C.).
(c) An Index to these registers.
(3) The Firearm User’s Licence and Firearm User’s
Employee’s Certificate Registers shall contain—
(a) the names and addresses of Firearm User’s Licensee
and Firearm User’s (Employee’s) Certificate Holders;
(b) particulars of firearms issued;
(c) payment of appropriate fees.
(4) The index shall contain the names of all Firearm User’s
Licensee and Firearm User’s (Employee’s) Certificate Holders in
alphabetical order.
4. Firearm User’s Licences and Firearm User’s (Employee’s)
Certificates may be granted to the following:
(a) public officers for the purpose of the exercise of their
functions;
(b) security guards and Supplemental Police Officers;
Firearm User’s
Licence
Firearm User’s
(Employee’s)
Certificate
Firearm
Registers
Persons who
may be issued
with a Firearm
User’s Licence/
Firearm User’s
(Employee’s)
Certificate
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 3
Firearms and Ammunition S.O. No. 40



(c) owners and managers of industrial concerns, farms
or large estates;
(d) watchmen, caretakers or employees of large
industrial concerns, farms or large estates.
5. Applications for the grant of licences, certificates or permits
in accordance with the Firearm’s Act, Chap. 16:01, shall be
addressed to the Commissioner. The applicant shall furnish all
relevant particulars and make any declaration as may be specified
on the prescribed form.
6. The Officer in charge of a Division, on receipt of a file con-
taining the application for a Firearm User’s Licence/Firearm
User’s (Employee’s) Certificate from the Commissioner for
enquiries into the suitability of an applicant shall—
(a) (i) submit the application to the Second Division
Officer in charge of the Station District in which
the applicant resides for enquiries; or
(ii) detail any police officer under his command, not
below the rank of Corporal, to investigate the
application;
(b) return all files sent to the Division for investigation
to the Commissioner within two (2) months from the
date of despatch.
7. The Second Division Officer in charge of a Station on receipt
of the application at paragraph 6(a)(i) above, shall—
(a) investigate the application; or
(b) detail an officer of or above the rank of Corporal to
investigate the application.
8. Police Officers investigating applications for Firearm User’s
Licenses or Firearm User’s (Employee’s) Certificates shall—
(a) interview the applicant and ensure that he is at least
eighteen (18) years of age;
4 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 40 Firearms and Ammunition
Application
for grant of
Licences,
Certificates or
Permits
Responsibility
of Officer in
charge of a
Division on
receipt of an
Application
Responsibility
of the Second
Division
Officer in
charge of
Station
Firearm
User’s
(Employee’s)
Certificate



(b) ensure that the applicant—
(i) is of good character (valid Certificate of
Character to be supplied);
(ii) possesses temperate habits;
(iii) is mentally and physically fit and capable of
using the type of firearm required;
(c) ascertain from the applicant the need for the type of
firearm required;
(d) ascertain whether the applicant is a “restricted
person” as defined in section 3 of the Firearms
Act, Chap. 16:01;
(e) interview persons with a view to ascertaining the
applicant’s character and behaviour;
(f) visit the land, premises or business place;
(g) cause the applicant to supply—
(i) proof of ownership of the land, premises or
business place;
(ii) evidence of transactions involving large
sums of cash where necessary;
(h) on completion of the enquiry, submit the file with
his recommendation and supporting documents to
the Officer in charge of the Division.
9. The Officer in charge of the Division, on receipt of the file,
where the investigation is completed, shall submit it to the
Commissioner of Police with his recommendation.
10. (1) The Officer in charge of the Division on receipt of a file
containing the approved Firearm User’s Licence and Firearm
User’s (Employee’s) Certificate shall—
(a) prepare a letter as shown at Appendix “A”, informing
the applicant that his request was approved;
(b) dispatch the said letter along with the Firearm
User’s Licence and relevant file to the Second
Division Officer in charge of the Station concerned.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 5
Firearms and Ammunition S.O. No. 40
Submission of
File to
Commissioner
of Police
Approval of
Application
and issue of
Firearm
User’s
Licence



(2) The Second Division Officer in charge of the Station
shall deliver such notification to the licensee and advise him to—
(a) take the notification to a Firearm Dealer of his
choice for insertion of the particulars of the firearm
to be purchased;
(b) return the notification with the particulars of the
firearm to be purchased within twenty-four (24)
hours.
(3) The Second Division Officer, on receipt of the notifica-
tion with the information shall—
(a) insert the particulars in the Firearm User’s
Licensee’s Booklet and place the notification in the
file;
(b) collect the appropriate fee and issue an official
receipt;
(c) hand over the Firearm User’s Licence to the
licensee to enable him to collect the firearm from the
Dealer;
(d) advise the licensee that he is to produce a certificate
of competence to the Second Division Officer in
charge of the Station District within one (1) month of
the purchase of the firearm;
(e) advise the licensee to return to the Station within
forty-eight (48) hours after receipt of the firearm and
ammunition from the Dealer.
(4) The Second Division Officer in charge of the Station on
the return of the licensee, shall—
(a) thoroughly inspect the firearm and ammunition and
complete the necessary certificate in the Firearm
User’s Licence;
(b) cause an entry to be made immediately in the
Firearm User’s Licence Register and Index at
Station;
(c) return the file to the Officer in charge of the
Division.
6 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 40 Firearms and Ammunition



11. The Commissioner has authorised Police Officers of and
above the rank of Corporal to collect the appropriate fees each
year with respect to Firearm User’s Licences and Firearm User’s
(Employee’s) Certificates and issue official receipts with respect to
such payments.
12. Authorised Officers collecting appropriate fees from
licence/certificate holders are guided by the following:
(a) Licensees’ who are required to pay the appropriate
fees as stipulated by section 39 of the Firearms Act,
Chap. 16:01, shall do so in person and the firearm
produced for verification along with a certificate of
fitness from a registered Medical Practitioner and  a
certificate of Competence from an approved and
accredited Firearms Training Institute.
(b) Where the firearm is produced by the holder of a
Firearm User’s (Employee’s) Certificate, the appro-
priate fee may be paid in the absence of the holder
of the Firearm User’s Licence, provided that the
authorised officer is satisfied that the holder of the
Firearm User’s Licence is alive and has authorised
the licensing of the firearm.
(c) Where the holder of a Firearm User’s Licence resides
in one “Police” District and has an estate in another
and he employs someone who is the holder of a
Firearm User’s (Employee’s) Certificate, the appro-
priate fees for the Firearm User’s Licence and the
Firearm User’s (Employee’s) Certificate shall be paid
in the “Police” District where the holder of the
Firearm User’s Licence resides.
(d) Where the holder of a Firearm User’s Licence resides
in one “Police” District and has estates in more than
one “Police” District with employees holding Firearm
User’s (Employee’s) Certificates on each estate, the
appropriate fees for the Firearm User’s Licence and
Firearm User’s (Employee’s) Certificates shall be
paid in the Police District appointed by the
Commissioner of Police.
Authorised
Officers
Guidelines to
Officers
Collecting
Appropriate
Fees
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 7
Firearms and Ammunition S.O. No. 40



(e) The Licence holder must produce the firearm(s)
mentioned in the licence/certificate.
(f) Ensure that the firearm produced, bears a legible
serial number and conforms with the description
shown in the licence/certificate.
(g) Where the firearm produced bears no serial number
or the serial number is indecipherable, the
authorised officer shall—
(i) take possession of the firearm together with
the Firearm User’s Licence;
(ii) send the firearm to the Forensic Science
Centre to determine its serial number;
(iii) on receipt of the Forensic Science Centre’s
report, submit the report, the Firearm
User’s Licence and a covering report to
the Officer in charge of the Division for
necessary action.
(h) Where the serial number of the firearm is different
from that on the Firearm User’s Licence and the
authorised officer is satisfied that an error was made
in the recording of the serial number, the firearm
is to be licensed and the Firearm User’s Licence
submitted, to the Commissioner, through the Officer
in charge of the Division, to be amended accordingly.
(i) Where a firearm is brought to a Station and it is
found to be unserviceable—
(i) point out the defects of the firearm to the
licensee;
(ii) take possession of the firearm;
(iii) issue a document stating the date, time,
particulars of firearm and the purpose for
which the firearm was retained;
(iv) inform the licensee that the firearm will be
sent to the Police Armourer for an opinion;
8 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 40 Firearms and Ammunition



(v) submit the defective firearm and a report
indicating the defects observed to
the Assistant Commissioner of Police
responsible for “Training” in order to obtain
the opinion of the Armourer;
(vi) the authorised officer, on receipt of the
Armourer’s opinion shall inform the
licensee;
(vii) hand over the firearm to the owner and
instruct him to have such firearm repaired
and returned to the Police Station within
fourteen (14) days when he shall pay the
appropriate fee.
13. The Officer in charge of the Division, upon receipt of the
report mentioned in 12(g)(iii) shall—
(a) where a criminal offence is disclosed, institute the
necessary proceeding;
(b) where no criminal offence is disclosed, submit the
report together with the firearm to the Assistant
Commissioner “Training” for restamping.
14. The Assistant Commissioner “Training”, after restamping
the firearm, shall submit the information of the “stamped” number
along with the relevant documents to the Commissioner of Police
in order to have the records pertaining to the firearm updated.
15. (1) Second Division Officers in charge of Stations are
required to submit a return to the Assistant Commissioner
“Finance” at the end of each year showing the names of licence
holders/certificates in their district who have failed to pay the
appropriate fees in respect of their firearms.
(2) Simultaneously, he shall investigate to ascertain the
reason for non-payment of the appropriate fees by the licence
holder or certificate holder.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 9
Firearms and Ammunition S.O. No. 40
Responsibility
of the Officer
in charge of
the Division
re an indeci-
pherable
Serial
Number
Responsibility
of the
Assistant
Commissioner
Training re
an indeci-
pherable
Serial
Number
Submission of
Return re
Non-payment
of Fees and
Investigation



(3) On completion of the investigation, he shall submit a
report to the Officer in charge of his Division.
16. (1) Police Officers are authorised to seize firearms and
ammunition from the holders of Firearm User’s Licence/Firearm
User’s (Employee’s) Certificate under the following circum-
stances:
(a) breach of the Peace involving the use of firearms; 
(b) by a Court Order; 
(c) age or infirmity;
(d) death: from the person in possession; 
(e) threats made with a firearm;
(f) any other reason as directed by the Commissioner of
Police.
(2) Whenever firearm and ammunition are seized in any of
the above circumstances, a report giving the particulars must be
submitted to the Commissioner of Police through the Officer in
charge of the Division within forty-eight (48) hours of such
seizure.
17. The action to be taken in respect of any firearm which has
been seized by or surrendered to the Police will depend upon the
circumstances in which such firearm comes in the possession of
the Police and the following procedures must be followed in
dealing with these firearms:
(a) When firearms are confiscated by Order of a
Court— 
These firearms will be sold or destroyed—
(i) In January each year all such firearms
will be forwarded by officers in charge
of Divisions/Branches to the Officer in
charge of Police Training College under
adequate escort.
(ii) At the Police Training College they will
be appraised by a Government Board of
Survey who will determine those
firearms that are for sale and those that
are for destruction.
Conditions for
seizure of
Firearms and
Ammunition
Procedure for
dealing with
seized and
surrendered
firearms
10 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 40 Firearms and Ammunition



(iii) 1. The firearms assigned for destruc-
tion will be checked, destroyed and
disposed of, in a manner directed by
the Commissioner of Police, under
the supervision of a First Division
Officer, who shall at the end of the
exercise, prepare and submit a cer-
tificate indicating what he has done
to the Assistant Commissioner of
Police under whose responsibility the
Armoury falls.
2. The Assistant Commissioner
“Training” shall, within fourteen (14)
days of receipt of the certificate of
destruction, submit such information
to the Central Firearm Registry at
Police Administration, in order to
have the relevant records amended.
(b) When a firearm is handed in to the Police by
the owner for destruction—
(i) The owner shall prepare and hand over
to the Police a written authority for
such destruction.
(ii) The Second Division Officer receiving
such firearm shall—
1. hand over the firearm to the
Property Manager, who will
record it in the General Property
Book;
2. submit a report through the
Officer in charge of his Division,
together with the written authority
from the licensee, to the
Commissioner of Police.
(iii) Where the Commissioner of Police has
given permission to have the firearm
destroyed, the Second Division Officer
shall—
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 11
Firearms and Ammunition S.O. No. 40



1. amend the Station records [General
Property Firearm User’s Licence
and Firearm User’s (Employee’s)
Certificate Registers];
2. convey the firearm to the
Armourer Shop during the first
week in June and December of
each year.
(iv) All firearms for destruction shall be
dealt with in the manner set out at
paragraph 17(a)(iii) 1.
(c) In cases where a firearm has been handed to
the Police for safe keeping—
(i) The Police Officer to whom the firearm
is handed, shall enquire from the owner,
the length of time that the firearm is
expected to be in the possession of the
Police. This information should be
noted in the Firearm Receipt Book and
the General Property Register when the
firearm is handed over to the Property
Manager.
(ii) At the expiration of the time referred to,
the owner shall be called upon to take
possession of it or to dispose of it to an
authorised person.
(iii) If the owner fails to comply with
instructions at (ii) above, at the expira-
tion of three (3) months after that date,
the Second Division Officer in charge of
the Station shall submit a report,
through the Officer in charge of his
Division, to the Commissioner of Police,
who will instruct whatever action will
be liken.
(iv) In addition to the above, the Second
Division Officer in charge of a Station,
shall only lodge the firearm and ammu-
nition of a Security Firm, on the
12 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 40 Firearms and Ammunition



production of a receipt issued by the
Officer in charge of “Finance Branch”,
in which is mentioned—
1. the quantity of firearms and
ammunition to be lodged;
2. the sum paid;
3. the period for which the firearm
and ammunition are to be kept.
(d) When the owner of a firearm leaves the
country permanently and this fact has been
established, the firearm shall be sent to the
Officer in charge of the Armoury for evaluation
by a Board of Survey.
(e) At all Stations a Firearm Receipt Book will be
kept for use in connection with firearms seized,
surrendered and left for safe keeping. In this book
will be entered the date, name and address of the
owner or person from whom the firearm is received,
and particulars of the firearm; any defects in the
firearm will be pointed out to him and noted. The
perforated slip will be removed from the Register
and given as a receipt to the owner or other person
responsible. If or when the firearm is returned, the
person receiving it will sign the counterfoil in the
Register, in the appropriate place.
(f) In all cases when firearms are sold, the proceeds
are to be deposited by the Officer in charge of
Finance Branch to the Commissioner of Police
“Suspense Account”. The Deposit Voucher shall
be written up as follows:
Head  III  TREASURY  DEPOSIT
Sub-Head  37  COMMISSIONER  OF  POLICE
(g) In the case of seized and surrendered firearms,
but not those forfeited by a Court, the Paymaster
should contact the owner as soon as possible
after the sale and pay to him the amount for
which the firearm is sold.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 13
Firearms and Ammunition S.O. No. 40



(h) On no account will firearms belonging to members of
the public be received in the Police Armoury for safe keep-
ing. Firearms will only be received at the Armoury for
valuation and disposal in accordance with the above
orders.
(i) When the owner of a firearm dies, as the property in that
vests in the Administrator General, unless and until there
is a grant of probate or administration, the matter will be
referred to the Administrator General for his advice and/or
instructions. This applies equally to death by suicide.
In all such cases, firearms will be lodged and kept at the
District Station, pending instructions from the
Administrator General.
18. (1) Whenever the holder of a Firearm User’s Licence reports
the loss or larceny of a firearm to the police—
(a) such loss shall be reported to the Commissioner of
Police within twenty-four (24) hours by the Officer in
charge of the Division.
(b) The Officer in charge of the Division shall ensure
that the report is investigated immediately.
(2) On the conclusion of the investigation into the loss of a
firearm, a report shall be sent within twenty-four (24) hours to the
Commissioner through the Officer in charge of the Division with
his recommendations.
19. (1) The Firearm User’s Licence and Firearm User’s
(Employee’s) Certificate shall be varied with the approval only by
the Commissioner of Police.
(2) All applications for the variation of Firearm User’s
Licence or Firearm User’s (Employee’s) Certificate shall be made
to the Commissioner on the appropriate form as shown at
Appendix “B”.
(3) Where the holders of Firearm User’s Licence and
Firearm User’s (Employee’s) Certificate have changed their
addresses, they are required to inform the Commissioner of Police
of such change of address within forty-eight (48) hours. No varia-
tion fee shall be collected for such a change.
14 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 40 Firearms and Ammunition
Lost or Stolen
Firearms
Variation of
Firearm
User’s
Licence/
Firearm
User’s
(Employee’s)
Certificate



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 15
Firearms and Ammunition S.O. No. 40



16 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 40 Firearms and Ammunition



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 17
Firearms and Ammunition S.O. No. 40