TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO POLICE SERVICE
STANDING  ORDERS  43
FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION



Financial Administration
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
SECTION
1. Financial Administration
2. Areas of Finance considered
3. Responsibility of the Officer in charge of Finance Branch
4. Security of Cash
PART  I
E
MOLUMENTS
5. Emoluments
6. Payment of Emoluments
7. Applications for Undrawn Emoluments
8. Overpayment of Unauthorised Payment
9. Recovery of Unauthorised Payment of Emoluments
10. Responsibility of an Officer desirous of receiving Emoluments through a
Commercial Bank 
11. Responsibility of an Officer in charge of Finance Branch on receipt of the
forms
12. Proviso for the recovery of Unauthorised Payment
13. Allowances
14. House Allowances
15. Procedure for obtaining House Allowance
16. Meal Allowance
17. Proficiency Allowances
18. Procedure for obtaining Proficiency Allowances
19. Responsibility of the Officer in charge of Division/Branch
20. Travelling Officers
21. Travelling Allowance
22. Issue of Travelling Diary
23. Special Travelling, Regulation 16, Chap. 23:50
24. Upkeep Allowance
25. Sea Blast Allowance
26. Depreciation Allowance
27. Preparation and submission of Travelling Diary and “Travelling Expenses
Voucher”—Mileage Claims
28. Late Submission
29. Submission of Completed Travelling Diary
2 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 43 Financial Administration



30. Travelling Expenses
31. Subsistence Allowance
32. Travelling Expenses and Subsistence Allowance Claims
33. Application for a Plane Ticket, i.e., Local Travel
34. International Travel
35. Advances
36. Pension
37. Procedure for obtaining Pension 
38. Designated Branch/Station
39. Pension Payments
PART  II
I
MPREST
40. Imprest
41. Irredeemable
42. Honour Certificate
43. Responsibility of the Officer allocated an Imprest
44. Submission of Honour Certificate
45. Handing over Imprest
PART III
G
OVERNMENT MONIES AND FINANCIAL REGISTERS
46. Government Monies
47. Financial Registers
48. Receipt Book
49. Cash Book
50. Counterfoil Receipt Book
51. General
52. Issue of Cash Book, Receipt Book and other Registers
53. Transfer of Registers
54. Instructions to Second Division Officers Regarding Government Monies
55. Guidelines to Second Division Officers in charge of Station/Office issued
with Receipt Books
56. Instructions when issuing a Receipt
57. Guidelines to Second Division Officers-in-charge of Station/Office issued
with Receipt Books
58. Keeping of the Cash Books
59. Preparation for submission of Cash Book, etc.
60. No Cash transaction during the month
61. Preparation of the ‘“Return of Counterfoil Receipt Books” Register
62. Duty of the Officer in charge of the Finance Branch
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 3
Financial Administration S.O. No. 43



63. Retrieval of Cash Book and Receipt Book
64. Inspections by Auditors, First Division Officers and Inspectors
65. Extraordinary Expenditure
PART IV
M
ESSING
66. Messing
67. Instructions for Messing
68. Procedure for Messing
69. Exemption from Messing
70. Deduction for Messing
PART V
C
ONTRACTUAL ARRANGEMENTS AND THE INCURRING OF DEBTS
71. Interpretation
(a) Contractual Arrangements
(b) Incurring of Debt
72. Head of Division/Section or Branch and the Secretary, Police Sports Club
73. Application
74. Head of Division/Branch or Chairman whom approval has been granted
75. Written permission of the Head of Division or Chairman of Sporting/
Cultural Club
76. Head of Division/Chairman of the Sporting/Cultural Section to submit
financial report
77. Copy to be sent to Secretary, Police Sports Club
78. Assistant Commissioner of Police and the Secretary, Police Sports Club to
provide Commissioner with all documents
4 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 43 Financial Administration



1. “Financial Administration” refers to the management of
government monies received by Police Officers for and on behalf of
the State, the management of funds allocated to the Police
Service, and includes the provisions for the payment of salaries
and other emoluments to Police Officers and persons entitled
thereto.
2. The areas of finance, which are under the purview of this
Standing Order are as follows:
(a) Emoluments:
(i) Salaries
(ii) Allowances
(iii) Advances
(iv) Pensions
(b) Imprest
(c) Government Monies and Financial Registers
(d) Messing.
3. (1) The Commissioner of Police has appointed the Officer in
charge of the Finance Branch to be responsible for “Financial
Management” in the Police Service.
(2) The Officer in charge of Finance Branch shall be
responsible for:
(a) ensuring that salaries, increments, advances, deduc-
tions and allowances are applied in accordance with
sections 13–42 of the Police Service Regulations,
Chap. 15:01;
(b) ensuring that personnel under his command are
acquainted with the Exchequer and Audit Act,
Chap. 69:01 and the Financial Regulations made
under the said Act;
(c) instructing personnel under his command regarding
the proper system of accounting, preparation of
documents and general directions which may be
given from time to time, by the Chief Personnel
Officer, Comptroller of Accounts and other relevant
authorities in relation to financial matters;
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 5
Financial Administration S.O. No. 43
Financial
Administra-
tion
Areas of
Finance
considered
Responsibility
of the Officer
in charge of
Finance
Branch



(d) the preparation of annual estimates of all expendi-
ture which he considers will be incurred by the Police
Service during the following year, for submission to
the Ministry of Finance through the Ministry of
National Security in accordance with ministerial
directions;
(e) ensuring that funds allocated to the Police Service
are applied only to purposes for which they are
intended;
(f) ensuring that payments are made with proper
authority;
(g) allocating the functions of the Branch to officers
under his command so as to maximise both
efficiency and effectiveness;
(h) ensuring that all officers who are required to hold
cash in the Police Service are provided with a safe or
strong room for securing government monies;
(i) exercising strict supervision over all officers
entrusted with actual handling of cash and/or
cheques, maintaining regular checks to avoid
negligence and fraud;
(k) ensuring that paysheets and other corresponding
registers are kept up to date;
(l) ensuring that paysheets and other subsidiary
documents are made up at least five (5) days before
the last full working day of the month;
(m) ensuring that paysheets and cheques are sent to
Divisions, Branches and Banks at least two (2) days
before the last full working day of the month;
(n) keeping the records of all officers paid from Personal
Emoluments Votes to enable him to determine at all
times—
(i) the rate of salary and any allowances
payable;
6 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 43 Financial Administration



(ii) the authorised deductions to be made from
the officer’s salary;
(iii) the dates on which increments become due;
(iv) the leave due and taken;
(v) any other matters affecting the personal
emoluments payable;
(o) detailing appropriate officers to carry out monthly
checks of financial registers, inclusive of the Imprest
Register, in all Divisions/Branches.
4. (1) An officer entrusted with the holding of cash shall:
(a) be personally responsible for its security;
(b) report immediately, to the Officer in charge, any loss
of cash entrusted to him and any irregular
endorsement on the paysheet or other financial
document.
(2) The Officer in charge shall, on receipt of the report at
paragraph (b) above, verify its authenticity and if necessary refer
the matter to the Officer in charge of Finance Branch and to the
Officer in charge of the Fraud Squad.
PART  I
E
MOLUMENTS
5. “Emoluments” refer to remuneration received such as
salaries, allowances, advances and pensions.
6. (1) The payment of Emoluments in any Division/Branch
shall be the responsibility of the Officer in charge of the Division
or a First Division Officer detailed by him.
(2) The First Division Officer-in-charge of a Division/
Branch, on receipt of a cheque for the payment of emoluments
from the Officer in charge of Finance Branch, may either cash the
cheque and pay the emoluments or appoint a First Division
Officer to do so.
Security of
Cash
Emoluments
Payment of
Emoluments
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 7
Financial Administration S.O. No. 43



(3) Police Officers collecting their emoluments at a
Divisional or Branch Office shall sign the paysheet. Those officers
collecting emoluments at Stations or Offices, shall sign
“establishment receipts” where the paysheet is not available.
(4) The Second Division Officer entrusted with emoluments
for payment to personnel at a Station shall:
(a) ensure its safe custody;
(b) on completion of the payment of emoluments, return
the undrawn emoluments, paysheets and signed
establishment receipts to the Officer in charge of the
Division/Branch not later than the fourth working
day after the official pay day.
(5) The Officer in charge of a Division/Branch, on receipt of
the paysheets, unpaid emoluments and establishment receipts,
shall submit them to the Officer in charge of Finance Branch no
later than the fifth working day after the official pay day.
(6) The Officer in charge of Finance Branch, on receipt of
the documents and cash mentioned at sub-paragraph (5) above,
shall deposit the unpaid emoluments at the Treasury not later
than seven (7) working days after the official pay day.
7. (1) A Police Officer who fails to draw his emoluments before
it has been returned to the Treasury, shall submit an application
to the Comptroller of Accounts through the Officer in charge of
Finance Branch, giving reasons for his failure to collect his
emoluments at the appropriate time.
(2) The Officer in charge of Finance Branch, on receipt of
the application mentioned at paragraph 7(1) above, shall forward
the application with a memorandum indicating the following:
(a) the officer’s entitlement; and
(b) the reason for non-payment of emoluments in the
normal way.
Applications
for Undrawn
Emoluments
8 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 43 Financial Administration



8. A Police Officer who receives an overpayment or an
unauthorised payment of emolument shall incur a debt which is
recoverable in full from him.
9. The Officer in charge of Finance Branch, whenever an
unauthorised payment or an overpayment is made to a Police
Officer shall—
(a) enquire into the cause of such error;
(b) inform the person overpaid of such error as soon
as practicable and determine the quantum to be
remitted;
(c) ensure that the error is corrected on the day of the
discovery;
(d) forward a report to the Comptroller of Accounts in
the prescribed manner as set out in section 164 of the
Financial Instructions, 1965;
(e) inform the Police Officer of the mode of repayment
decided upon by the Comptroller of Accounts.
10. Police Officers desirous of obtaining their emoluments
through any Commercial Bank shall—
(a) complete the form in duplicate, as set out in
Appendix “A” and take them to the Bank of their
choice where it will be stamped;
(b) return both forms to the office of the Finance Branch
for certification.
11. The Officer in charge of Finance Branch, on receipt of the
duplicate forms shall after certification and stamping, return one
of the forms to the Police Officer for transmission to the
Commercial Bank.
12. The procedures aforementioned with respect to the
payment of emoluments and the recovery of unauthorised
payment or overpayment shall be applicable to persons other than
Police Officers who receive emoluments through the Police
Department.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 9
Financial Administration S.O. No. 43
Overpayment
of
Unauthorised
Payment
Recovery of
Unauthorised
Payment of
Emoluments
Responsibility
of an Officer
desirous of
receiving
emoluments
through a
Commercial
Bank 
Responsibility
of an Officer
in charge of
Finance
Branch on
receipt of the
forms
Proviso for
the recovery
of
Unauthorised
Payment



13. Police Officers are eligible to receive allowances in
categories included hereunder or any other category as may be
approved from time to time:
(a) House Allowance
(b) Meal Allowance
(c) Proficiency Allowance
(d) Travelling and Subsistence Allowance.
14. (1) Police Officers who are not provided with Government
Quarters are eligible for House Allowance.
(2) House Allowance is paid to two (2) categories of officers:
(a) Unmarried
(b) Married.
15. (1) (a) Police Officers, who are married and wish to claim
House Allowance, shall, except in special circum-
stances, submit their claim not later than three (3)
months after marriage to the Officer in charge of
Finance Branch.
(b) Married officers when submitting their claim for
House Allowance, shall attach their original
Marriage Certificate.
(2) Unmarried officers need not apply.
16. Police Officers are eligible for Meal Allowance at such rates
and manner as may be approved from time to time.
17. (1) “Proficiency Allowance” refers to remuneration paid to
the police officers authorised to perform specialised duties or use
special skills.
(2) Police Officers performing any of the skills listed as at
Appendix “B” are eligible for proficiency allowance.
(3) Proficiency Allowance shall not be paid to a police officer
whilst on sick leave or any other leave of absence in excess of
fourteen (14) days.
10 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 43 Financial Administration
Allowances
House
Allowances
Procedure for
obtaining
House
Allowance
Meal
Allowance
Proficiency
Allowances



18. Police officers authorised to perform specialised or skilled
duties necessitating the payment of proficiency allowance, shall
apply for such payment to the Officer in charge of Finance Branch
through the Office in charge of their Divisions/Branches within
three (3) months of the commencement of such duties.
19. The First Division Officer-in-charge of a Division/Branch on
receipt of the application mentioned at paragraph 18 above, shall
submit such application to the Officer in charge of Finance Branch
within seven (7) days of the receipt of such application.
20. “Travelling Officers” refer to Police Officers holding the
rank of Inspector and above and any other officer so designated
and approved by the Chief Personnel Officer to receive “Travelling
Allowance”.
21. “Travelling, Allowance” refers to a specific sum paid to
officers who are authorised to use their private motor vehicles in
the performance of their duties.
22. (1) The Officer in charge of Finance Branch shall, at the
beginning of each year, issue to each “Travelling Officer” a diary
in the prescribed form and which shall be called a “Travelling
Diary”.
(2) Travelling Officers shall record official journeys in their
Travelling Diaries, and the entries shall include—
(a) Dates;
(b) Time of departure from Station/Office;
(c) Time returned to Station/Office;
(d) Distance travelled;
(e) Reason(s) for travelling.
23. (1) Whenever it becomes necessary for a police officer
under the rank of Inspector to carry out a specific duty using his
motor vehicle, the Officer in charge of the Division/Branch/Unit to
Procedure for
obtaining
Proficiency
Allowances
Responsibility
of the Officer
in charge of
Division/
Branch
Travelling
Officers
Travelling
Allowance
Issue of
Travelling
Diary
Special
Travelling
Regulation 16,
Chap. 23:50
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 11
Financial Administration S.O. No. 43



which the officer is attached, shall apply to the Commissioner for
prior approval indicating the following:
(a) nature and purpose for travelling;
(b) period required to travel;
(c) destinations;
(d) type of vehicle owned by the officer;
(e) amount of kilometres expected to travel.
(2) Police Officers travelling under Regulation 16 of
Chap. 23:50 are not entitled to payment of Upkeep Allowance.
24. (1) “Upkeep Allowance” refers to a specified sum of money
paid to a Travelling Officer each month to assist in the main-
tenance and repairs of his private motor vehicle authorised for
use in the performance of his official duty.
(2) Upkeep Allowance shall also be paid in the following
circumstances:
(a) on ordinary sick leave;
(b) where an officer is on sick leave followed by
extended sick leave during any month—for the whole
of that month only;
(c) on occasions of casual absences;
(d) during periods of annual leave earned and
accumulated under the Police Service Regulations;
(e) for the first three months in respect of full pay study
leave not exceeding twelve months (the allowance is
not payable for any part where the period of study
leave exceeds twelve months);
(f) where an officer travels abroad on official duty;
(g) during periods of special duty leave up to fourteen
(14) days;
(h) where an officer has been suspended from duty
without loss of pay;
Upkeep
Allowance
12 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 43 Financial Administration



(i) on reinstatement after a period of interdiction pro-
vided the arrears of the allowance are applied
towards installments which had been suspended
during the period of interdiction; for the whole of the
month in which a female officer proceeds on mater-
nity leave;
(j) for a maximum period of one month where the motor
vehicle which an officer is required to keep and use
for the performance of his official duties, is undergo-
ing repairs;
(k) while acting in a higher post which requires the
holder to keep and use sufficient means of transport
in the performance of his official duties;
(l) during periods of annual leave taken while acting in
a higher post provided that the  officer’s substantive
post is a scheduled travelling post.
25. (1) Travelling Officers stationed in undermentioned
districts may claim “Sea Blast Allowance” in respect of official
travel within their districts:
(a) Tobago
(b) Cedros
(c) Toco
(d) Blanchisseuse
(e) Mayaro.
(2) Officers who are not stationed in any of the areas
mentioned above, but are required to travel to and work in one or
more of such areas, for more than twelve (12) working days in any
one calendar month may also claim the said allowance.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 13
Financial Administration S.O. No. 43
Sea Blast
Allowance



(3) “Sea Blast Allowance” shall be calculated as follows:
(a) Tobago and Cedros—15 % of upkeep allowance;
(b) Toco, Blanchisseuse and Mayaro—10 % of upkeep
allowance.
26. (1) Depreciation Allowance at approved rates may be paid
to Travelling Officers who are required to use their motor vehicles
and work for more than twelve (12) working days in any month or
stationed in the following districts:
(a) Tobago
(b) Blanchisseuse
(c) Caroni
(d) Nariva/Mayaro
(e) St. David
(f) Victoria except San Fernando
(g) South Trinidad
(h) St. Andrew
(i) St. George East
(j) St. Patrick.
(2) Depreciation Allowance shall be calculated at 15% of the
kilometre rate travelled in the above-mentioned districts.
27. (1) Officers shall, at the end of each month, prepare and
submit their Travelling Diaries and claims in the following
manner:
(a) Calculate, the total distance travelled as recorded in
their Travelling Diaries. Transfer the entries made
in the Travelling Diaries to the “Travelling Expenses
Voucher—Mileage Claims” Form.
(b) Record in the space provided in the “Travelling
Expenses Voucher—Mileage Claims” Form the
allowance(s) claimed, the rate(s) and distance
travelled. See specimen at Appendix “C”.
14 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 43 Financial Administration
Depreciation
Allowance
Preparation
and
submission of
Travelling
Diary and
“Travelling
Expenses
Voucher”—
Mileage
Claims



(c) Submit the “Travelling Expenses Voucher—Mileage
Claims” together with the Travelling Diary to the
Officer in charge of the Division/Branch by the
seventh (7th) day of the succeeding month.
(2) The Officer in charge of a Division/Branch on receipt of
the “Travelling Expenses Voucher—Mileage Claim” and the
“Travelling Diary” shall—
(a) attest to the correctness of the entries made in both
documents;
(b) affix his signature in a conspicuous place in the front
portion of the “Travelling Expenses Voucher—
Mileage Claim” Form and beneath the last entry in
the “Travelling Diary”;
(c) return the diary to the Travelling Officer;
(d) submit the “Travelling Expenses Voucher—Mileage
Claims” Form within seven (7) days of receipt to the
Officer in charge of Finance Branch.
28. (1) Officers who fail to submit their travelling claims
within the designated period, shall write the reason(s) for the late
submission of their claims in the space provided at the bottom
overleaf of the “Travelling Expenses Voucher Mileage Claims”
Form.
(2) The Claim Form with the reason(s) for the late sub-
mission shall be verified by the receiving officer.
29. Completed “Travelling Diaries” shall be submitted to the
Officer in charge of Finance Branch within seven (7) days of the
succeeding year.
30. “Travelling Expenses” refers to the sum of money
expended by Police Officers other than travelling officers and
officers eligible to travel under Regulation 16 of Chap. 23:50, for
transportation to perform official duties outside of the county in
which, they are stationed.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 15
Financial Administration S.O. No. 43
Late
Submission 
Submission of
Completed
Travelling
Diary
Travelling
Expenses



31. (1) “Subsistence Allowance” refers to the sum of money
paid to a Police Officer in the following circumstances:
(a) when on official duty outside of the county in which
he is stationed for a period in excess of six (6) hours;
(b) when attending an official training course outside
the county in which he is stationed.
(2) The period of absence in respect of which a Police Officer
may claim Subsistence Allowance is calculated from the time of
his departure from his Station to the time of his return to his
Station.
(3) Claims for Subsistence Allowance shall only be paid to
Police Officers where it is greater than Meal Allowance for the
said period.
32. (1) Travelling Expenses and Subsistence Allowances to
Police Officers as mentioned at paragraphs 30 and 31 above, shall
be made on the prescribed “Travelling Expenses Voucher” Form as
shown at Appendix “D”.
(2) Police Officers when claiming a refund of the cost of
transportation are permitted to claim the cost of one way by
“Route Taxi” and the other by Public Transportation (Public
Transport Service Corporation Bus).
33. Police Officers proceeding to Tobago or officers proceeding
to Trinidad on official duty, shall obtain a return plane ticket in
the following manner:
(a) those in Trinidad shall apply to the Officer in charge
of Finance Branch through the Officer in charge of
their Division(s) stating the date and purpose for
which the ticket is required;
(b) those in Tobago shall apply to the Officer in charge of
Tobago Division stating the information as at (a).
34. Police Officers travelling abroad on official duty, shall
travel under such conditions and receive such allowances as are
approved by the Chief Personnel Officer.
16 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 43 Financial Administration
Subsistence
Allowance
Travelling
Expenses and
Subsistence
Allowance
Claims
Application
for a Plane
Ticket, i.e.,
Local Travel
International
Travel



35. Police Officers proceeding on vacation leave of not less
than fourteen (14) days, may receive an advance of salary, not
exceeding one month’s salary in accordance with the provisions
laid down in Section 20 of the Police Service Regulations,
Chap. 15:01.
36. “Pension” refers to that fixed sum of money paid to a police
officer on retirement from the Service and which may be paid by
lump sum or deducted at his option, on a monthly basis.
37. (1) A Police Officer whose retirement is imminent or
wishes to retire voluntarily, shall apply in writing to the
Commissioner of Police at least six (6) months before the date of
retirement with a view to having his benefits computed.
(2) The application shall include—
(a) an original Birth Certificate;
(b) the “Option Form” as shown at Appendix “E”
indicating whether the retiring officer elects to
receive a reduced pension and gratuity on
retirement.
38. It shall be the duty of a Police Officer at least one (1) month
before his date of retirement, to inform the Officer in charge of
Finance Branch of a Branch/Station to which his pension may be
sent.
39. The Second Division Officer entrusted with pension
payments shall ensure the following:
(a) where the pensioner comes in person, he shall sign
and present an establishment receipt as shown at
Appendix “F”;
(b) where the pensioner is unable to collect his pension
in person, a form as shown at Appendix “G” signed by
the pensioner in the presence of any of the
categories of persons mentioned on the said Form,
shall be presented for payment by the person
designated by the pensioner.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 17
Financial Administration S.O. No. 43
Advances
Pension
Procedure for
obtaining
Pension 
Designated
Branch/
Station
Pension
Payments



PART  II
IMPREST
40. “Imprest” refers to cash advanced by the Commissioner to
an Officer in charge of a Division/Branch in order to meet “petty
expenditure” that may arise from time to time in the course of his
official duties.
41. “Irredeemable Imprests” refers to imprests that are not
required to be retired at the end of each year, but all payments
from such imprests shall be brought to account in the year in
which the transactions occurred.
42. “Honour Certificate” refers to a statement submitted at the
end of each year by persons allocated an “Imprest” attesting to the
amount of irredeemable imprests on hand as at 31st December.
43. The Officer in charge of a Division/Branch who has been
allocated an imprest shall—
(a) obtain a receipt for all cash transactions;
(b) keep a record of all such transactions and secure the
receipts for verification;
(c) submit sub vouchers of transactions during any
month along with a statement to the Officer in
charge of Finance Branch for redemption;
(d) balance the “Imprest Cash Book” on the following
occasions:
(i) at the end of the each month when sub
vouchers are being redeemed;
(ii) when the “Imprest” is being retired;
(iii) when the cash balance of an “irredeemable
imprest” is being carried forward at the
end of the year and the “Honour
Certificate” submitted to the Officer in
charge of Finance Branch as shown
hereunder at paragraph 44;
Imprest
Irredeemable
Honour
Certificate
Responsi-
bility of the
Officer
allocated an
Imprest
18 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 43 Financial Administration



(e) when handing over charge of an “Imprest” to
another officer, check the imprest cash and sub
vouchers on hand and prepare a handover in the
Imprest Cash Book which shall be certified and
signed by both officers. Specimen of the handover is
shown at paragraph 45.
44. (1) The Officer in charge of a Division/Branch who has been
allocated an “Imprest” shall at the end of each year submit the
“Honour Certificate” to reach the Officer in charge of Finance
Branch before 31st December.
(2) On submission the cash must be retained by the Officer
in charge of the Division/Branch. However, all vouchers on hand
must be forwarded together with the “Honour Certificate” in the
format as shown hereunder:
HONOUR  CERTIFICATE
Total Receipts $        Cash on Hand $
Total Payments $        Sub Voucher on Hand  $
Balance $        Vouchers in Transit $
Amount of Imprest $
45. The Police Officer in charge of a Division/Branch when
handing over charge of an “Imprest” shall not balance off the
Imprest Cash Book but the following information and certificates
shall be inserted and witnessed by the officer checking:
Total Receipts $ Cash on Hand $
Total Payments $ Sub Voucher on Hand $
Balance $ Vouchers in Transit $
Amount of Imprest $
Submission of
Honour
Certificate
Handing over
Imprest
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 19
Financial Administration S.O. No. 43



I certify that I have this.................day of.................................20......
received from ...............................in the presence of .........................
.............................................................................imprest cash in the
amount of ........................................... dollars and....................cents
which agrees*/disagrees* with the balance shown above.
I have also received unredeemed sub vouchers totalling .................
dollars and.................cents.
...........................................................
Officer Taking Over
We certify that the above is a true and correct statement and that
the Cash and Sub Vouchers on hand as detailed above were
checked and received by ..................................................in our
presence.
.........................................................
Officer Handing Over
.........................................................
Officer Checking
*Delete whichever is inapplicable
PART  III
GOVERNMENT MONIES AND FINANCIAL REGISTERS
46. “Government Monies” refers to cash received by Police
Officers for and on behalf of the State and includes such sums
paid for services rendered by Police Officers, but does not include
money that is “found property” or an “exhibit”.
47. “Financial Registers” refer to Cash Books, Receipt Books
and other registers used for the purpose of accounting for
Government Monies.
48. A “Receipt Book” is one of the “Financial Registers” which
is used to attest to the collection of Government Monies.
20 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 43 Financial Administration
Government
Monies
Financial
Registers
Receipt Book



49. A “Cash Book” is one of the “Financial Registers” used for
recording on a daily basis the particulars of the official receipts
which represent the amount of Government Monies collected,
deposited and/or remitted.
50. “Counterfoil Receipt Book” refers to a Financial Register in
which is recorded the monthly return of Official receipt books and
the Cash book submitted to the Officer in charge of the Finance
Branch at the end of each month.
51. Financial Registers issued for the receipts and payments of
Government Monies shall be administered in the manner
specified in paragraphs 52 to 65 of PART III to this Standing
Order.
52. The Officer in charge of Finance Branch shall:
(a) issue two (2) Cash Books, a sufficient number of
Revenue Receipt Books and other registers to
Divisional Offices, Branches and Stations where
Government Monies are received;
(b) attach an “issue note” stating the description and
printed numbers of the Receipt Book(s) issued;
(c) keep a record of the description and printed numbers
of all Receipt Books issued.
53. Without the prior consent of the Officer in charge of the
Finance Branch, Financial Registers shall not be transferred from
one Division/Branch/Section/Unit/Station/Office to another.
54. The Second Division Officer-in-charge of a Station/Office
where Government Monies are collected shall ensure that—
(a) receipts are issued for monies paid in;
(b) the monies are secured against loss;
(c) the monies are deposited at the Treasury or the
District Revenue Office on the day collected and an
official receipt obtained;
Cash Book
Counterfoil
Receipt Book
General
Issue of Cash
Book, Receipt
Book and
other
Registers
Transfer of
Registers
Instructions
to Second
Division
Officers
Regarding
Government
Monies
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 21
Financial Administration S.O. No. 43



(d) where monies are collected after Treasury hour (2:00
p.m.) or on a public holiday or on weekends, the sums
are deposited on the first working day thereafter, at
the Treasury or District Revenue Office and an
official receipt obtained;
(e) where monies are collected on the last working day of
the year, it shall be deposited before the Treasury
hour on that day and not carried over to the
succeeding year;
(f) a “NOTICE” as shown hereunder is exhibited in a
conspicuous place in the Charge Room for the
information of members of the public.
NOTICE
THE ATTENTION OF MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC IS DRAW
TO THE FACT THAT A NUMBERED OFFICIAL RECEIPT
MUST BE OBTAINED WHENEVER PAYMENTS ARE
MADE.
BY ORDER OF THE COMMISSIONER OF POLICE
Receipt Books
55. The Second Division Officer-in-charge of a Station/Office
after receiving a new Receipt Book shall do the following:
(a) enter the particulars of the Receipt Book received
in the “Receipt Book Register” which shall be
recorded as shown hereunder:
(b) check each page of the Receipt Book with the dupli-
cate and ensure that they are correctly numbered;
Guidelines to
Second
Division
Officers-in-
charge of
Station/Office
issued with
Receoipt
Books
22 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 43 Financial Administration
Tye of 
Receipt Book
Certificate of
Character
Receipt Book
NumberedDate
Received
6.6.92 306001 306100 7.6.92 13.12.92 1.1.93
From To
Date from
which in use
Date
Completed
Date returned
to Finance
Branch



(c) acknowledge receipt by returning the “issue note”,
within four (4) days after receipt, to the Officer in
charge of the Finance Branch;
(d) whenever an error is discovered in a new Receipt
Book, it shall be returned to the Officer in charge of
the Finance Branch specifying the error discovered;
(e) take steps to ensure, that receipts are issued in
consecutive order;
(f) where it appears that a Receipt Book will be
completed before the end of a month, an application
in writing shall be made to the Officer in charge of
the Finance Branch for an additional Receipt Book.
56. (1) Police Officers who collect Government Monies shall
issue a numbered official receipt in respect of each payment to the
person paying the money.
(2) He shall without delay, issue an official receipt to the payer.
(3) (a) He shall not alter or deface any receipt, or alter
and/or amend the amount stated in words and/or
figures on a receipt.
(b) Where an error is made, the receipt shall be
cancelled by writing the word “Cancelled” on the
original and duplicate of the receipt, which must be
left in the book.
(4) He shall not destroy a receipt that has been spoilt,
damaged and/or incorrectly written. The receipt shall be cancelled
in the manner stated at (3)(b).
(5) He shall not make use—of Government Monies in any
unauthorised way; neither advance nor lend any monies collected
for which he is accountable.
Cash Book
57. The Second Division Officer-in-charge of a Station/Office,
before a Cash Book is put into use, shall comply with the
following instructions:
(a) number each page of the book consecutively in blue
or black ink;
Instructions
when issuing
a Receipt
Guidelines to
Second
Division
Officers-in-
charge of
Station/Office
issued with
Receipt Books
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 23
Financial Administration S.O. No. 43



Keeping of
the Cash
Books
(b) at the bottom of the last numbered page, prepare and
sign the following certificate:
“I hereby certify having checked the pages of this
book and found them correctly numbered from one
to .........”;
(c) on the outside front cover the following shall be
written:
(i) the name of the Station/Office;
(ii) cash book;
(iii) date commenced;
(iv) date completed.
58. The Cash Book shall be divided into two (2) sections as
shown at Appendices “H1” and “H2”—
(a) the left side or “Receipts” section is used for the
recording of cash collected;
(b) the right side or “Payments” section is used for
recording the deposits and payments of cash;
(c) the “Receipts” section of the Cash Book consists of six
(6) columns and shall be dealt with as  follows:
(i) in the column marked—write  the  number  of  the
entry to  be made, com-
mencing from one with
other numbers following
consecutively;
(ii) in the column marked— write the date that is
inserted on  the duplicate
of the official receipt
which was issued to the
payer;
24 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 43 Financial Administration
“Entry Number” 
“Date”



(iii) in the column marked— write the printed num-
ber of the duplicate of the
receipt issued. If more
than one receipt of
the same denomination
was issued on the said
date, the numbers of
the receipts issued shall
be entered in block
(e.g., 1–19; 29–63; 69–86);
(iv) in the column marked—divide the column into two
equal parts by drawing
a straight line down the
middle. Head the left
column—“Revenue” and
the other column—“Other
Receipts”;
(1) under the column— write  the  denomination
headed of revenue
received (e.g., F.U.L.S/
Gun, P.A.Y.E., R.F.P.,
C.O.C., etc.);
(2) under the column—write the denomination of
other cash received;
(v) in the column headed—where  monies—received
are to be divided into
Revenue and Other
Receipts, the amount
which represents each
category as shown in the
Description of Revenue
Column, shall be written
against each category of
payment;
“Receipt Number” 
“Description  of 
Revenue” 
“Details of Amounts
where necessary” 
“Revenue” 
headed “Other
Receipts” 
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 25
Financial Administration S.O. No. 43



(vi) in the column headed—write the total amount   of
money received, as
reflected in the duplicate
copy of the receipt issued;
(d) the “Payments Section” of the Cash Book consists of
six (6) columns. A Police Officer, when recording the
particulars of a receipt in the payment section of the
Cash Book, shall number the first recorded receipt as
“1” in red ink at the top of the receipt and the other
receipts are to be numbered consecutively in the same
manner;
(e) where an entry is to be made in the “Payments”
section of the Cash Book, it shall be dealt with as
follows:
(i) in the column marked— write  the  date that
is written on the
receipt received;
(ii) in the column marked— write the number of
the    entry    to    be
made commencing
from one, with other
numbers following
consecutively;
(iii) in the column marked— divide  the  column
into two equal parts
by drawing a
straight line down
the middle. Head the
left column—
“Revenue” and the
other column—
“Other Receipts”;
26 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 43 Financial Administration
“Amount” 
“Date” 
“Entry No.” 
“How Disposed of” 



(1) under the column— write  the  denomina-
tion headed of the
revenue paid in, the
receipt number and
the name of the
Revenue Office where
the payment was
made;
(2).under the column—write the name of the
place headed or the
person(s) to whom
the money was paid.
Where payment is
made to more than
one person, write the
name of each person
to whom the pay-
ments were made;
(iv) in the column headed—where  payment  has
one   person   on   a
receipt, write the
amount that is paid
to each person as
shown on the pay-
ment receipt;
(v) in the column headed— write the total amount
of money paid as
reflected in the pay-
ment receipt(s);
(vi) in the column headed— the  number  written
on  each  receipt  in
red ink, as men-
tioned at paragraph
58(iv), shall be
entered in this
column against the
relevant entry;
“Revenue” 
“Amount” 
“Voucher” 
“Other Receipts” 
“Details of Amounts
where necessary”
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 27
Financial Administration S.O. No. 43



(f) in addition to the instructions above, Police Officers
recording entries in the Cash Book shall comply with
the following:
(i) all entries shall be made in blue or black ink
and written in a neat, clean and legible
mariner;
(ii) each entry shall be numbered consecutively;
(iii) the particulars of each receipt shall be
entered in a consecutive and chronological
manner;
(iv) entries shall not be made in violet or green
ink;
(v) lines shall not be skipped between entries;
(vi) erasures shall not be made;
(vii) liquid paper or any other substances shall
not be used to obliterate an entry;
(viii) pages shall hot be stuck or glued together;
(ix) figures and/or words shall not be altered or
overwritten; an erroneous entry shall be
corrected by drawing a neat single line in
ink across the entry and inserting the
correct entry above it;
(x) all alterations shall be initialled by the
officer responsible for making it;
(xi) record daily in the Cash Book all cash
received, deposited and/or paid out.
59. (1) The Second Division Officer-in-charge of the
Station/Office shall, at the end of each month, but not later than
the fourth (4th) day of the succeeding month, submit to the
Officer in charge of Finance Branch, the Cash Book and Receipt
Books used for the current month, along with the “Return of
Counterfoil Receipt Books”. A specimen is shown at Appendix “I”.
(2) Before submission, the Second Division Officer-in-
charge of the Station/Office shall—
Preparation
for sub-
mission of
Cash Book,
etc.
28 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 43 Financial Administration



(a) ensure that the total amount of cash received for the
month corresponds with payments made. Where
cash received has to be carried forward to another
month, the particulars of the cash shall be recorded
in the payments section;
(b) ensure that the summary of transactions made
during the month is entered beneath the last entry
made in the payment section of the Cash Book. See
Appendix “H2” for specimen;
(c) certify the Cash Book beneath the last entry using
the certificate hereunder:
“I hereby certify having checked the Cash Book and found it
........................................................................................... and that
the (state whether correct, or incorrect)   balance    of    cash    at
the    end
of the month is      in   agreement   with
.................................................. on hand.”
(state amount of cash, if any)
.....................................................................................
Signature of Second Division Officer-in-charge
(3) Any cash on hand that was not deposited or paid must
be carried forward to the succeeding month and recorded the
alternate Cash Book as the first transaction for that month.
60. Where there are no cash transactions during a month, the
Second Division Officer-in-charge of a Station/Office, shall submit:
(a) the Cash Book with his certificate;
(b) the “Return of Counterfoil Receipt Books” in which
shall be mentioned the Receipt Books kept at
Station.
No Cash
Transaction
during the
month
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 29
Financial Administration S.O. No. 43



61. (1) The “Return of Counterfoil Receipt Books” shall be
prepared in triplicate.
(2) The original and duplicate of the “Return of Counterfoil
Receipt Books” are to be submitted to the officer in charge of
Finance Branch and the triplicate remains in the register as a
station record.
(3) A Police Officer preparing the “Return of Counterfoil
Receipt Books” shall adhere to the following instructions:
(a) head across the first line of the return as follows:
“Books sent for Auditing”;
(b) in Column 1—write the description of the Receipt
Book to be submitted and quote the numbers of the
first to the last numbered receipt (e.g.,
C.O.C.266801—266900)—
(c) in Column 2—write  the  numbers  of  unused
receipts of  the Receipt Book that is
written in Column 1;
(d) in Column 3—write the numbers of the receipts
used during the month under review
from the Receipt Book written in
Column 1;
(e) in Column 4—write the numbers of the Receipt
Book as at Column 1, if the book was
completed during the month under
review;
(f) (1). draw a line beneath the entry of the last Receipt
Book to be submitted;
(2). enter immediately beneath the line drawn the
words, “BOOKS KEPT, AT STATION”;
(3). list the Receipt Books in the same manner as at
(b) and (c) above.
Preparation
of the Return
of Counterfoil
Receipt Books
Register
30 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 43 Financial Administration



62. The Officer in charge of Finance Branch, on receipt of the
Cash Book, Receipt Books and the Return of Counterfoil Receipt
Books, shall—
(a) ensure that the books are audited;
(b) ensure that the books are returned to the Station/
Office, at least two (2) working days before the end of
the month;
(c) where a discrepancy has been discovered in a Cash
Book or Receipt Book—
(i) cause an inquiry to be made in the matter;
(ii) if necessary, refer the matter to the Fraud
Squad.
63. The Second Division Officer-in-charge of a Station/Office
shall ensure that the relevant Cash and Receipt Books for the
ensuing month are returned to the Station/Office before the last
working day of the month.
64. (1) Whenever internal and/or external Auditors, First
Division Officers and Inspectors visit a Station/Office in an official
capacity, it shall be the responsibility of the Second Division
Officer-in-charge of the Station/Charge Room/Office to produce
the Cash Book, Receipt Book and cash on hand for inspection.
(2) Where any discrepancy has been discovered, the
Second Division Officer-in-charge of the Station/Office shall
submit an immediate report to the Officer-in-Charge of the
Division/Branch stating the discrepancy(s) identified and what
action he has since taken.
(3) The Officer in charge of the Division/Branch, on receipt
of the report mentioned at paragraph (2) above, shall—
(a) inform the Officer in charge of Finance Branch;
(b) cause an inquiry to be made in the matter;
(c) if necessary, refer the matter to the Fraud Squad.
Duty of the
Officer in
charge of the
Finance
Branch
Retrieval of
Cash Book
and Receipt
Book
Inspections
by Auditors,
First Division
Officers and
Inspectors
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 31
Financial Administration S.O. No. 43



65. Where, for any reason “extraordinary expenditures” have
been incurred in any Division/Branch, such as the costs for the
removal of dead bodies, payment of costs to witnesses summoned
to attend Departmental Tribunals, etc., the Officer in charge of
the Division/Branch shall certify and submit the bill, along with a
report explaining the purpose for which the expenditure was
incurred, to the Officer in charge of Finance Branch.
PART  IV
M
ESSING
66. (1) “Messing” refers to the provision of meals to Police
Officers when performing duties.
(2) Police Officers who are required to perform duties where
meals are supplied during a period of Emergency, National Crisis,
General/Local Elections and on special occasions are said to be in
“Mess”.
67. Whenever it becomes necessary for Police Officers to be in
“Mess”, the officers in charge of Divisions shall make arrange-
ments for messing, on the advice and instructions of the Officer in
charge of the Finance Branch.
68. Police Officers in charge of Divisions shall adhere to the
following procedure:
(a) engage the services of a caterer;
(b) inspect the facilities for the preparation and distri-
bution of meals to ensure that—
(i) they meet acceptable health standards;
(ii) they can provide quality meals on time;
(c) ensure that the caterer and assistants are each in
possession of a valid Food Handler’s Licence;
(d) instruct the Second Division Officers-in-charge of
Stations—
(i) to prepare a nominal roll for each day of all
officers in Mess;
(ii) to ensure that the recipients sign for their
meals;
Extraordinary
Expenditure
Messing
Instructions
for Messing
Procedure for
Messing
32 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 43 Financial Administration



(iii) verify that the amount of meals supplied is
consistent with the amount of meals
received;
(iv) to submit to him, within seventy-two (72)
hours after the conclusion of the period of
messing, the caterer’s bill(s) and a certified
nominal roll with the names of the Police
Officers who were in mess;
(e) on receipt of the documents mentioned at para-
graph (d)(iv)—
(i) examine the documents and satisfy himself
as to their correctness;
(ii) countersign the Second Division Officer’s
certificate;
(iii) submit the original Mess Accounts to the
officer in charge of the Finance Branch with-
in seven (7) days after the conclusion of the
period of messing or as directed;
(iv) file a copy of the Mess Accounts submitted.
69. Police Officers not desirous of being in Mess shall submit
their application for exemption in writing to the officer in charge
of the Finance Branch through the officer in charge of the
Division, or as directed.
70. Police Officers who are required to be in Mess, shall not
receive Meal Allowance for that period unless otherwise directed.
PART  V
C
ONTRACTUAL ARRANGEMENTS AND THE INCURRING OF DEBTS
71. For the purposes of this Order—
(a) “Contractual Arrangements”—refers to the negotiat-
ing and/or agreeing to accept goods on behalf of/or in
the name of the Police Service for payment in return
at some later or specific date.
Exemption
from Messing
Deduction for
Messing
Interpretation
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 33
Financial Administration S.O. No. 43



(b) “Incurring of Debt”—refers to the obligation to pay
an outstanding sum.
72.The Head of Division/Section or Branch and the Secretary, Police
Sports Club shall apply, in writing, to the Assistant Commissioner of
Police charged with responsibility for that area to solicit credit financing
on behalf of, or in the name of the Police Service for his approval.
73. (a) The application shall include—
(i) the nature and objective of the project/pro-
gramme/event for which finance is being sought;
(ii) the benefit of the project/programme/event to the
Police Service;
(iii) an itemised costing for the venture;
(iv) competitive bids from at least two (2) Service
providers for items listed at (iii) above. If one bid
is supplied the reason for that selection must be
clearly stated;
(v) proposed sources of income; including a list of
prospective donors/sponsors;
(vi) an implementation time table;
(vii) the names of the members of the designated
planning and/or implementation Committee and
their responsibilities;
(viii) the name of the officer who is accountable for the
finances for the project/programme/ event; and
(ix) the proposed date of the project/programme/
event.
(b) Applications shall be submitted at least four (4) weeks prior
to the tentative date of  the event.
74. The Head of Division/Branch or Chairman of the
Sporting/Cultural Section to whom approval has be granted shall—
(a) supervisor the event;
(b) sign all correspondence relative to the event;
34 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 43 Financial Administration
Head of
Division/
Section or
Branch and
the Secretary,
Police Sports
Club
Application
Approval of
Head of
Division/
Branch



(c) forward to the appropriate Assistant Commissioner
of Police all correspondence pertaining to the
event/project/programme; and
(d) select members of the Division/Sporting/ Cultural
Section and Civilian Employees to serve on the
Committee.
75. Committee members shall first obtain the written permis-
sion of the Head of Division or Chairman of the Sporting/Cultural
Section to transact any business on behalf of, or in the name of,
the Police Service.
76. (1) The Head of Division/Chairman of the Sporting/
Cultural Section, within seven (7) days after the event has
concluded, shall submit a financial report to the Assistant
Commissioner of Police.
(2) The report shall contain:
(a) statement of expenditure and income;
(b) the names and/or addresses of companies and private
individuals paid;
(c) the name and/or addresses of companies and private
individuals for whom sums are outstanding; and
(d) the amount outstanding (if any).
77. In the case of the Sporting/Cultural Section, a copy shall be
sent to the Secretary, Police Sports Club.
78. The Assistant Commissioner of Police and the Secretary,
Police Sports Club shall provide the Commissioner of Police with
all documents in circumstances where outstanding sums cannot
be paid.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 35
Financial Administration S.O. No. 43
Written per-
mission of the
Head of
Division or
Chairman of
Sporting/
Cultural Club
Head of
Division/
Chairman of
the Sporting/
Cultural
Section to
submit
financial
report
Copy to be
sent to
Secretary,
Police Sports
Club
Assistant
Commissioner
of Police and
the Secretary,
Police Sports
Club to
provide
Commissioner
with all
documents



36 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 43 Financial Administration



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 37
Financial Administration S.O. No. 43



38 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 43 Financial Administration



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 39
Financial Administration S.O. No. 43



40 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 43 Financial Administration



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 41
Financial Administration S.O. No. 43



42 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 43 Financial Administration



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 43
Financial Administration S.O. No. 43



44 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 43 Financial Administration



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 45
Financial Administration S.O. No. 43



46 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 43 Financial Administration



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 47
Financial Administration S.O. No. 43