TRINIDAD   AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
STANDING  ORDERS  44
MOTOR VEHICLE AND ROAD TRAFFIC CONTROL
INVESTIGATION AND PROCEDURE



Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control
Investigation and Procedure
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
SECTION
PART  I
MOTOR VEHICLE AND ROAD TRAFFIC CONTROL
AND PROCEDURE
1. Motor Vehicle
2. Road
3. Road Traffic
4. Traffic Offences
5. Road Traffic Control
6. Notice to fixed Penalty
7. Notice of Request
8. Warning of Intended Prosecution
9. Enforcement of
10. Registers
11. Regulating Traffic by use of Hand Signals
12. Second Division Officer in charge of a “Impounding Crew”
13. Authority for Removal of Vehicles
14. Duties of the First Division Officer in charge of a Division
15. Duties of the Second Division Officer in charge of the Impounding
Operations
16. Responsibilities of the Officer in charge of the “Impounding Bay”
17. Impounding vehicles of Diplomats
18. Unclaimed Impounded Vehicles
19. Prosecution of Offenders
20. Procedure for issuing Fixed Penalty Ticket
21. Data collection of payments or nonpayment of Fixed Penalty
22. Duties of the Complainant in Ticketed Offences
23. Duty of the Second Division Officer-in-charge
24. Procedure for Laying an Information
25. Duty of the Second Division Officer on Receipt of a File
26. Powers of arrest under the Motor Vehicles and Road Traffic Act,
Chap. 48:50
2 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
S.O. No. 44 Investigation and Procedure



PART  II
ROAD TRAFFIC ACCIDENT INVESTIGATION AND PROCEDURE
27. Road Traffic Accident
28. Serious Accident
29. Fatal Accident
30. Trivial Accident
31. Government Vehicle
32. Accident Registers
33. Mode of Reporting Accidents
34. Drivers to be warned of Intended Prosecution
35. Procedure for warning a Driver of Intended Prosecution
36. Duty of a Police Officer Receiving a Report of an Accident
37. Duty of a Second Division Officer in charge of the Charge Room/Traffic
Section when an accident is reported
38. The primary functions of an investigator in a Road Traffic Accident
39. Duty of the Investigator of a Road Traffic Accident
40. Duty of a Second Division Officer-in-charge with respect to the Road
Traffic Accident Register
41. Duty of a Second Division Officer in charge: On Completion of an Accident
Investigation
42. Duties of the driver of a Police Vehicle involved in an accident
43. Duty of the Officer in charge of the Division where the Vehicle is posted
44. Duty of the Officer in charge of the Division Investigating
45. Duty of the Assistant Commissioner “Mobile”
46. Submission by the investigator
47. Submission by the investigator
48. Duty of the Inspector in charge or Area Inspector
49. Duty of the First Division Officer
50. Submission by the Investigator
51. Duty of the Inspector in charge or Area Inspector
52. Duty of the First Division Officer
53. Duty of the First Division Officer in the case of Police Officers in their
private capacity
54. Investigation
55. Officer in charge of the Division
56. Prosecution
57. Road Traffic Accident involving Bicycle, section 36 of Chap. 48:50
58. Supplying of information pertaining to a Road Traffic Accident
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 3
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
Investigation and Procedure S.O. No. 44



PART  I
MOTOR VEHICLE AND ROAD TRAFFIC CONTROL
AND PROCEDURE
1. “Motor Vehicle” refers to any mechanically propelled vehicle
intended or adapted for use on roads.
2. “Road” means any street, road or open space to which the
public is granted access and any bridge over which a road passes
and includes any privately owned street, road or open space to
which the public are granted access generally or conditionally.
3. “Road Traffic” refers to motor vehicles of every description,
bicycles, and tricycles and includes pedestrians and all animals
being ridden, driven or led on a road.
4. “Traffic Offence” refers to any breach of the Highways Act,
Chap. 48:01, the Motor Vehicles and Road Traffic Act, Chap. 48:50
and any other Orders and Regulations governing the use of
the road.
5. “Road Traffic Control” refers to mechanisms adopted for the
proper regulation of traffic on a road and includes the lawful
directions by a Police Officer in uniform on a road, traffic signs
and symbols, the rules, regulations and orders made under the
Motor Vehicles and Road Traffic Act and the Highways Act.
6. “Notice of Fixed Penalty” refers to a printed ticket in
the format as shown at Appendix “A1” and “A2” issued by a
Police Officer to a person liable for any of the offences listed in
Appendix “B”.
7. “Notice of Request” refers to a document prepared by a Police
Officer and served on the owner of a motor vehicle as defined in
section 93(i) of the Motor Vehicles and Road Traffic Act, Chap.
48:50, requesting information as to the driver and other particu-
lars of a vehicle relative to the commission of a traffic offence on a
stated date, time and place on the form as shown at Appendix “C”.
4 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
S.O. No. 44 Investigation and Procedure
Motor Vehicle
Road
Road Traffic
Traffic
Offences
Road Traffic
Control
Notice to
fixed Penalty
Notice of
Request



8. “Warning of Intended Prosecution” refers to a verbal notice
to, or a document as shown at Appendix “D”, served on the driver
of a vehicle informing him that he may be prosecuted for one or
more of the following offences:
(a) dangerous driving;
(b) reckless driving;
(c) careless driving;
(d) exceeding the speed limit.
E
NFORCEMENT OF ROAD TRAFFIC CONTROL
9. Road Traffic Control is enforced by Police Officers as follows:
(a) giving lawful direction including the use of hand
signals;
(b) the impounding of vehicle in breach of the Motor
Vehicle and Road Traffic Act, Regulations or Orders;
(c) the prosecution of offenders who contravenes the
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Act, Regulations or
Orders and the Highways Act.
10. The Second Division Officer in charge of a Station shall open
and maintain the following registers:
(a) Traffic Offence Register.
(b) Traffic Case Book.
(c) Duplicate Fixed Penalty Ticket Despatch Register.
(d) Fixed Penalty Ticket Book Movement Register.
(e) Impounded Vehicles Register.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 5
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
Investigation and Procedure S.O. No. 44
Warning of
Intended
Prosecution
Enforcement
of
Registers



TRAFFIC OFFENCE REGISTER
Police Officers entering a traffic offence in this Register
shall comply with the instructions hereunder:
(a) in Column 1—enter the date on which the
report was made in the Station
Diary;
(b) in Column 2—enter the actual time the report
was made in the Station Diary;
(c) in Column 3—enter the following:
(i) the Station Diary’s reference (page
and paragraph number) when the
report was entered in the Station
Diary;
(ii) the Monthly Serial Number (abbrevi-
ated M.S. No.) which represents the
total number of reports of offences of
all classes or types for the month to
date;
(iii) the Annual Serial Number (abbrevi-
ated A.S. No.) which represents the
total number of reports of offences of
all classes or types for the year to
date;
(iv) the Monthly Offence Serial Number
(abbreviated M.O.S. No.) which
represents the total number of
reports of a particular class or type of
offences for the month to date;
(v) the Annual Offence Serial Number
(abbreviated A.O.S No.) which
represents the total number of
reports of a particular class or type of
offences for the year to date;
6 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
S.O. No. 44 Investigation and Procedure



(vi) the Case Book Number, when an informa-
tion has been laid in Court and/or a Notice
of Fixed Penalty has been issued;
(vii) the information number when an infor-
mation for a traffic offence has been laid
in Court or the Notice of Fixed Penalty
number, when issued;
(e) in Column 4— enter the following:
(i) the name of the offence;
(ii) the date of the offence;
(iii) the time of the offence; and
(iv) the place of the offence;
(f) in Column 5—enter the following:
(i) the final classification of the offence at the
top space;
(ii) the statutory reference of the offence
reported in the space provided; and
(iii) between (a) and (b), classification letter
and A.O.S. No. of the offence to date, in
red ink;
(g) in Column 6—enter the number, rank, name and
station address of the complainant;
(h) in Column 7—enter the name, address and Driving
Permit number of the driver and the
vehicle number;
(i) in Column 8—enter—
(i) the number, rank and name of the
Police Officer detecting the offence
and particulars of action taken with
respect to the issuing of the Notice
of Fixed Penalty and/or receiving
instructions;
(ii) name and address of person prosecuted;
and
(iii) dates of court hearing;
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 7
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
Investigation and Procedure S.O. No. 44



(j) in the Results Column—enter—
(i) the final results of the offence as deter-
mined in court, and affix his signature
and date to the entry, in red ink; and
(ii) the date the Notice of Fixed Penalty was
paid in the case of a ticketed offence.
D
UPLICATE FIXED PENALTY TICKET
DISPATCH REGISTER
(a) This Register shall be drawn up in accordance with
the specimen shown at Appendix “E” and used when
dispatching the Duplicate Fixed Penalty Ticket to
the Court.
(b) Police Officers delivering the Duplicate Fixed
Penalty Tickets to the Court shall obtain a signature
in the column provided from the person to whom
they are delivered.
F
IXED PENALTY TICKET BOOK MOVEMENT REGISTER
(a) This Register shall be drawn up in accordance with
the specimen shown at Appendix “F” and used for
the issue and return of Fixed Penalty Ticket Book to
Police Officers proceeding on and returning off
official duty.
(b) The Police Officer issuing the Ticket Book shall record
the serial number of the first unused ticket in the book
and the serial number of last ticket.
(c) The Police Officer recording the return of a Ticket
Book to the Station, shall enter the serial number of
the first unused ticket in the book and the serial
number of the last ticket.
I
MPOUNDED VEHICLES REGISTER
(a) The Second Division Officer in charge of a Station in
which vehicles are impounded shall open and main-
tain a register known as the “Impounded Vehicles
Register”.
(b) This Register shall be drawn up and records made in
accordance with the specimen shown at Appendix “G”.
8 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
S.O. No. 44 Investigation and Procedure



REGULATING TRAFFIC BY USE OF HAND SIGNALS
11. Police Officers are required to give “hand signals” when
regulating traffic in the manner prescribed hereunder:
(a) To halt a vehicle approaching from the front—
extend the right arm and hand at full length
above the right shoulder, with palm of the hand
towards the vehicle. Where two vehicles are
approaching by converging roads, and only one is
to be halted, the regulating officer should face
towards the driver of the vehicle to be halted to
show clearly that the signal is intended for him.
(b) To halt a vehicle from behind—
extend the left arm and hand horizontally from
the shoulder, with the back* of the hand towards
the driver of the vehicle.
Signal (a) may be given with the left hand and
(b) with the right hand if circumstances so
require, but the method described should be
adhered to as far as possible.
(c) To halt vehicles approaching—simultaneously from
front and behind—
extend both arms as described in (a) and (b).
When halting a vehicle from behind, the officer
must see that the signal is observed and obeyed
by the driver before turning his back to the
traffic or a serious accident may result.
(d) To bring on a vehicle which has been halted by
signal (a)—
beckon to the driver with the hand nearest to the
vehicle. If necessary, turn slightly towards the
driver to show clearly that the signal is intended
for him.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 9
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
Investigation and Procedure S.O. No. 44
Regulating
Traffic by use
of Hand
Signals



(e) To bring on a vehicle—
carry the hand forward with a circular sweep
across the body until it almost touches the oppo-
site shoulder. The signal should be made with the
arm extended and not merely with the forearm or
hand, and the arm should be on a level, with the
shoulder throughout the motion.
This signal should be used in all cases except
where (d) applies.
(f) Clear to the left—
facing vehicle extend right hand horizontally from
the shoulder with the palm of the hand to the front.
(g) Clear to the right—
same as (f) but with left arm.
(h) To halt one and give clear to another where two
vehicles are approaching at right angles—
to halt the one, proceed as indicated in (a), and to
clear the other, carry the arm nearer the vehicle
with a circular sweep across the body until it
almost touches the opposite shoulder.
The arm should be on a level with the shoulder
throughout the motion.
(i) To slow a vehicle down—
extend the right arm at full length above the
shoulder, palm to the front, and move the arm
forward and downward to the height of the
shoulder and back till the signal is seen.
(j) No vehicle is to be allowed to proceed before it is
ascertained that the road is clear to traffic and/or
safe for such vehicle to proceed.
I
MPOUNDING OF VEHICLES
12. The Second Division Officer-in-charge of the “impounding
crew” shall be of the rank of Corporal or above.
Commenda-
tions
10 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
S.O. No. 44 Investigation and Procedure
Second
Division
Officer in
charge of a
“Impounding
Crew”



13. Where a vehicle is parked on a road—
(a) in contravention of the Motor Vehicles and Road
Traffic Act, Chap. 48:50 and/or Regulations or
Orders made under the said Act;
(b) is left on any road in such a manner that is likely to
cause obstruction to persons lawfully using the road
and—
(i) the driver or other person in control of the
vehicle is not present or;
(ii) the driver or other person in control of the
vehicle refuses to remove the vehicle, it
shall be the duty of a Police Officer to
remove or authorise the removal of the
motor vehicle by wrecker.
14. Where it becomes necessary to impound vehicles in
accordance with section 108 of the Motor Vehicles and Road
Traffic Act, Chap. 48:50, the officer in charge of the Division
shall—
(a) designate a place for safe storage of the vehicles,
hereafter referred to as an “impounding bay”;
(b) appoint a Second Division Officer to supervise the
operations of impounding vehicles;
(c) provide adequate manpower to manage and provide
security for the “impounding bay”.
15. It shall be the duty of the Second Division Officer-in-charge
of the impounding operation to do the following:
(a) ensure that—
(i) the functions of the impounding crew are
efficiently and tactfully carried out;
(ii) impartial enforcement of the Traffic Laws;
(iii) the impounding crew does not engage in
altercations with members of the public;
(iv) the impounding crew does not violate any
Traffic Law in carrying out its functions.
Authority for
Removal of
Vehicles
Duties of the
First Division
Officer in
charge of a
Division
Duties of the
Second
Division
Officer in
charge of the
Impounding
Operations
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 11
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
Investigation and Procedure S.O. No. 44



(b) where it is necessary to remove a vehicle by wrecker
to a designated place of safety—
(i) make brief enquiries in the immediate
vicinity in an effort to locate the driver;
(ii) if he is not found remove the vehicle;
(iii) if the driver is found, prefer the relevant
charge(s) against him for the offence
committed and request him to remove the
vehicle. However, if he refuses, impound
the vehicle;
(c) where a vehicle has been hooked up or is in the
actual process of being hooked up to a wrecker, but
the vehicle has not been removed from where it was
parked and the driver or person in control of the
vehicle simultaneously appears and claims the
vehicle, he shall—
(i) release the vehicle to the driver or person
claiming the vehicle;
(ii) issue a ticket(s) for the offence(s)
committed; or
(iii) prosecute the driver or person in charge of
the vehicle for non-ticketed offence(s)
committed;
(d) make an entry in his official Pocket Diary stating:
(i) the registration number of the vehicle to be
impounded;
(ii) the offence committed;
(iii) time, date and place of the offence;
(iv) damages, if any, prior to the removal;
(e) on arrival at Station:
(i) record in the register, the particulars of the
vehicle and any damage caused to the
vehicle, while in the process of removal;
(ii) if open, remove property and lodge it with
the senior Police Officer on duty at the
“impounding bay.”
12 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
S.O. No. 44 Investigation and Procedure



16. It should be the responsibility of the officer in charge of the
impounding bay to do the following:
(a) cause entries to be made in the Station Diary with
respect to—
(i) the description of the vehicle including any
visible damage;
(ii) property handed over to him;
(b) submit daily to the officer in charge of the Division/
Branch, a return of vehicles impounded over the
past twenty-four (24) hours. A specimen of the return
is shown at Appendix “H”;
(c) before a vehicle is released to the owner, driver or
person in control of the vehicle:
(i) examine the certificate of Insurance of the
vehicle and the Driving Permit of the
driver retrieving the vehicle, to ensure that
these documents are valid and record the
particulars in the register;
(ii) collect the appropriate fee and issue an
official receipt to the person retrieving the
vehicle;
(iii) deliver property, if any, which were lodged
and at the same time obtain a signature for
them;
(iv) examine the vehicle in the presence of the
person retrieving it;
(v) (1) record in the Station Diary any com-
plaints made by the driver or owner,
(2) such complaints shall be referred to
the officer in charge of the Division/
Branch, who shall detail a Second
Division Officer to investigate;
(vi) obtain the signature of the person retriev-
ing the vehicle in the register;
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 13
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
Investigation and Procedure S.O. No. 44
Responsi-
bilities of the
Officer in
charge of the
“Impounding
Bay”



(d) deposit daily, at the Treasury/District Revenue
Office, monies collected for the removal and storage
of impounded vehicles.
17. (1) Motor vehicles owned or driven by persons accorded
immunity under the Privileges and Immunity (Diplomatic,
Consular and International Organization) Act, Chap. 17:01 are
not subject to attachment, that is, being towed away by the police.
(2) However, where such vehicles are causing an obstruction
to the extent that the road becomes impassable and the owner can-
not be located the vehicle may be impounded.
(3) Whenever a vehicle belonging to a person entitled to
Diplomatic Immunity, is impounded for the commission of a traffic
violation, it shall be the duty of the Second Division Officer-in-charge
of the impounding bay to—
(a) exempt such person from the payment of impound-
ing and storage fees;
(b) inform the person claiming the vehicle of the specific offence
committed against the laws of the country;
(c) make entries in respect of the action taken in the
Station Diary and submit a report to the First
Division Officer-in-charge of the Division/Branch.
18. Where a vehicle is impounded and remains unclaimed for a
period in excess of thirty (30) days, it shall be the duty of the
officer in charge of the Division/Branch to comply with the
instructions at section 109 of the Motor Vehicles and Road Traffic
Act, Chap. 48:50.
P
ROSECUTION OF OFFENDERS
19. (1) A Police Officer may prosecute a person for a traffic
offence in the following manner:
(a) by issuing a Notice of Fixed Penalty;
(b) “laying” a complaint at the Magistrate’s Court;
(c) arrest without a warrant.
14 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
S.O. No. 44 Investigation and Procedure
Impounding
vehicles of
Diplomats
Unclaimed
Impounded
Vehicles
Prosecution
of Offenders



(2) where a Police Officer detects a traffic offence, he shall—
(a) inform the Offender of the violation he has
committed;
(b) obtain his name and address;
(c) record the registration number of the vehicle and the
particulars of the Driving Permit and Certificate of
Insurance.
P
ROCEDURE FOR ISSUING A FIXED PENALTY TICKET
20. Where the offence detected is one mentioned in the
Schedule of the Motor Vehicles and Road Traffic (Enforcement
and Administration) (Amendment) Order, 1984, the Police
Officer shall issue a Fixed Penalty Ticket in the following
manner:
(a) write out the Notice in quintuplicate;
(b) give the original of the Notice to the driver of the
vehicle or in the absence of the driver, affix it to
the vehicle along with the Fixed Penalty Sticker;
(c) deliver the duplicate copy of the Notice to the Clerk
of the Peace at the Court in the district in which the
Notice was issued within twenty-four (24) hours of
issue, or if not practicable, the first working day
thereafter;
(d) despatch the triplicate copy to the registered owner
of the vehicle within five (5) days of the issue;
(e) retain the quadruplicate copy of the Notice for
inclusion in the Case File;
(f) leave the quintuplicate copy in the Notice of Fixed
Penalty Book as a Station Record;
(g) record the offence in the Station’s Traffic Offence
Register and Case Book immediately on his return
off duty.
Procedure for
issuing Fixed
Penalty
Ticket
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 15
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
Investigation and Procedure S.O. No. 44



21. (a) (i) Officers in charge of Divisions, other than
Port-of-Spain Division, Western Division and
North Eastern Division shall obtain from the Clerk
of the Peace in their District, data in respect of
payment or nonpayment of Fixed Penalty within
two (2) days after the expiration of the period
allotted for payment of the Notice.
(ii) However, with respect to Port-of-Spain Division,
North Eastern Division and Western Division, the
Officer-in-charge of Traffic Branch shall obtain the
data referred to above from the Clerk of the Peace
at the Port-of-Spain Magistrate’s Court and
disseminate them.
(b) The Officer-in-charge of the Division/Branch, on receipt
of the data referred to at (a) above, shall cause it to be
disseminated to the various complainants, within three
(3) days of receipt, through the Second Division Officer-
in-charge of the Station/Section, to which they are
attached.
22. (a) The complainant, on receipt of the information, shall
update the Station Registers, e.g., Traffic Offence
Register; Case Book.
(b) In the case where the information received refers to
the nonpayment of a Notice of Fixed Penalty, the
complainant shall prepare and submit a Case File to
the Second Division Officer-in-charge of the
Station/Section within seven (7) days of receipt of the
information.
23. The Second Division Officer-in-charge of a Station/Section
shall, on receipt of the Case File mentioned at paragraph 22 (b),
submit such file to the Court Prosecutor in the Court District in
which the matter is to be heard, through his Area Officer within
ten (10) days of such receipt.
Data collec-
tion of pay-
ments or non-
payment of
Fixed Penalty
Duties of the
Complainant
in Ticketed
Offences
Duty of the
Second
Division
Officer-in-
charge
16 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
S.O. No. 44 Investigation and Procedure



PROCEDURE FOR LAYING AN INFORMATION IN A TRAFFIC OFFENCE
24. A Police Officer laying an information for a traffic offence
shall—
(a) enter the offence on the same day in the Traffic
Offence Register drawn up in accordance with the
specimen as shown at Appendix “I” at the Station in
the district in which the offence was detected and
classify the offences in accordance with Appendix “F”.
(b) prepare an “Information” (Complainant With Oath)
in triplicate within fourteen (14) days of the detec-
tion of the offence and submit it to his immediate
senior for checking and initialling.
(c) lay the “Information” in Court immediately after it
was initialled.
(d) obtain the “Information” number and date of hearing
of the case and enter them in the Traffic Offence
Register Case Book, Traffic Accident Register and
the Charge Book, whichever is applicable.
(e) retain the triplicate copy of the “Information” for
inclusion in the Case File.
(f) prepare and submit the completed Case File to the
Second Division Officer-in-charge of the Station
within fourteen (14) days after laying the
“Information(s)” in Court.
25. The Second Division Officer to whom a Traffic Offence
“Information” and/or file has been submitted shall:
(a) In the case of an “Information”
check the file to ensure that the wording of the
charge and the statutory reference are correct
before initialling.
(b) In the case of a Case File
(i) check the file to ensure that the evidence
provided is sufficient to support the charge laid;
(ii) submit the file to the Court Prosecutor, through
the Area Officer.
Procedure for
Laying an
Information
Duty of the
Second
Division
Officer on
Receipt of a
File
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 17
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
Investigation and Procedure S.O. No. 44



26. Police Officers are reminded that there are no general
powers of arrest under the Motor Vehicles and Road Traffic Act,
Chap. 48:50, except in the following circumstances:
(a) Driving without a Driving Permit. See Provision in
section 42(1).
(b) Driving under the influence of drink or drug—
section 70.
(c) “Reckless Driving” section 71(1) which must be
committed within the officer’s view and any of the
conditions listed hereunder must exist—
(i) the driver refuses to give his name and address;
(ii) the driver gives a name and address which the
Police Officer believes to be false;
(iii) the vehicle does not bear an “Identification
Plate”.
(d) Using the vehicle without the owner’s consent—
section 74(a).
(e) The driver refusing to give his name and address or
giving a false name or address—section 93(2).
(f) The driver refusing to proceed to the nearest weigh
bridge at the request of a Police Officer in uniform—
section 97(2).
PART  II
R
OAD TRAFFIC ACCIDENT INVESTIGATION AND PROCEDURE
27. “Road Traffic Accident” refers to a collision on a road
involving traffic, which results in damage to vehicle(s) and
property or causing injury, and/or death to persons and/or
animals.
28. “Serious Accident” refers to a collision on a road, which
results in injury to persons and/or animals or serious damage to
property.
29. “Fatal Accident” refers to a Road Traffic Accident resulting
in the death of a person.
18 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
S.O. No. 44 Investigation and Procedure
Powers of
arrest under
the Motor
Vehicles and
Road Traffic
Act, Chap.
48:50
Road Traffic
Accident
Serious
Accident
Fatal
Accident



30. “Trivial Accident” refers to a Road Traffic Accident where there
is no injury to persons but the damage to vehicles and property is
minimal and there is no serious breach of the Traffic Laws.
31. “Government Vehicle” refers to a vehicle owned by a
Ministry or Government Department such as: Defence Force,
Prisons, Fire Service, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Works,
Ministry of Education, but does not include a vehicle owned by a
Statutory Board such as Water and Sewerage Authority,
Telephone Service of Trinidad and Tobago, Public Transport
Service Corporation, etc.
32. The Second Division Officer-in-charge of a Station shall
open and maintain the following registers:
(a) Road Traffic Accident Report Register as shown at
Appendix “K”.
(b) Accident File Movements Register as shown at
Appendix “L”.
(a) ROAD TRAFFIC ACCIDENT REGISTER
Police Officers recording Road Traffic Accidents in
this register shall comply with the instructions here-
under:
(i) (1) Record at the top of Forms “A”, “B” and
“C”, the particulars of the Insurance of
the vehicles involved in the accident
which shall include: Registration
Number of the vehicle; Name of the
Insurance Company; Name of the
Insured; Certificate Number;
Date of issue of the Insurance; Expiry
Date of the Insurance.
(2) In the case of accidents involving
Diplomats, Police Vehicles and
Government Vehicles, record in red ink in
bold capitals on the top of the front cover
of the Accident Case Jacket, that is the “C”
form and on the top of the “A” and “B”
forms the words: “DIPLOMAT”, “POLICE
VEHICLE” and “GOVERNMENT
VEHICLE” whichever is applicable.
Trivial
Accident
Government
Vehicle
Accident
Registers
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 19
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
Investigation and Procedure S.O. No. 44



(ii) in column 1—record the following:
(1) the name and address of the person
reporting the accident;
(2) the mode of reporting, the Station, time,
day, month, year of report;
(3) the details of the accident including the
time, day, month, year and location of
accident.
(iii) in column 2—record the following:
(1) in the space headed “Registration
Number and Type of Vehicle” record the
registration number and the class of
motor vehicle, e.g., Private Car, Hired
Car, etc., that was involved in the
accident.
(2) in the space headed—“Name and
Address of Owner”—record the name
and address of the registered owner of
the vehicle that was involved in the
accident.
(3) in the space headed—“Insured/Not
Insured” record whether the    vehicle is
insured or not.
(4) in the space headed—“Name and
Address of Driver”—record the name
and address of the driver of the vehicle.
(5) in the space headed—“Particulars of
Driving Permit of Driver/ Provisional
Permit”—record the Driving Permit
Number, Date of Issue, Expiry Date and
Class of Vehicle authorised to drive.
(6) in the space headed—“Licensed/
Unlicensed”—record whether the
vehicle is licensed for the current year.
20 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
S.O. No. 44 Investigation and Procedure



(iv) in Column 3—record in the first space,
the highest degree of injury sus-
tained by a person in the particu-
lar category and the sex, age and
degree of injury sustained by each
person in the particular category.
(v) in Column 4—enter the damages done to
the vehicle and/or property, and
name and address of owner.
(vi) in Column 5— enter briefly the facts
surrounding the accident.
(vii) in Column 6—delete where applicable so as
to give a clear picture of the scene
of the road traffic accident.
(viii) in Column 7—enter the number, rank and
name of the Police Officer detailed
to investigate the report.
(ix) in Column 8—record the number, rank and
name of the Police Officer who
determined that the accident was
trivial.
(x) in Column 9—the Second Division Officer
who checked and forwarded the
“C” form of the Accident Register
to the investigator shall affix his
name and the name of the Station.
(xi) In addition to the above, the officer in
recording the report in the
Register shall:
(1) number each report of a
Road Traffic Accident con-
secutively, by putting the
total number of reports for
the month against the
abbreviations M.S. at the
top of the page;
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 21
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
Investigation and Procedure S.O. No. 44



(2) number the total number of
reports of Road Traffic Accident
for the year, by putting the
total number of reports of Road
Traffic Accident for the year to
date against the abbreviations
A.S. at the top of the page; and
(3) Code the accident in accord-
ance with Appendix “N”.
(b) ACCIDENT FILE MOVEMENTS REGISTER
The Second Division Officer in charge of a Station
shall ensure that a record is made in the Accident
File Movements Register on the following occasions:
(i) upon delivery of a Road Traffic Accident
file to an investigator;
(ii) on the return of a file from the investigator
to the Second Division Officer;
(iii) upon submission of a Road Traffic Accident
file to an Inspector or First Division
Officer;
(iv) upon submission of a Road Traffic Accident
file to a Court Prosecutor; and
(v) upon submission of a Road Traffic Accident
file to the Divisional or Branch
Headquarters, for filing.
33. Road Traffic Accident can be reported by the driver of a
motor vehicle to the Police in the following manner:
(a) to a Police Officer in uniform:
(i) at the time and place of the accident;
(ii) on patrol in the vicinity of the accident;
(b) to a Police Officer at a Police Station either:
(i) in person;
(ii) by telephone; or
(iii) by any other person on his behalf.
22 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
S.O. No. 44 Investigation and Procedure
Mode of
Reporting
Accidents



34. Police Officers shall warn drivers involved in Road Traffic
Accidents of “Intended Prosecution”.
35. A Police Officer shall warn a driver involved in a Road Traffic
Accident of “intended prosecution” in the following manner:
(a) Verbally, on the day of the accident by stating the following:
“I warn you that you will be reported for the
question to be considered of prosecuting you
with one or more of the following offences:
Exceeding the speed limit;
Reckless or Dangerous Driving; or
Careless Driving”.
(b) If he was not warned verbally on the day of the
accident, he shall be served with a “Notice of intend-
ed prosecution”, within fourteen (14) days of the
accident; either—
(i) in person;
(ii) by sending such notice by registered mail to
him; or
(iii) to the person registered as the owner of the
vehicle, at the address at which the vehicle
is registered.
36. It shall be the duty of a Police Officer receiving a report of
an accident to do the following:
(a) obtain and record—
(i) the name(s) and address(es) of the driver(s)
of the vehicle(s) involved in the accident;
(ii) the registration number(s) of the vehicle(s);
(iii) the particulars of the Driving Permit(s) of
the driver(s) and the Certificate(s) of
Insurance of the vehicle(s);
Drivers to be
warned of
Intended
Prosecution
Procedure for
warning a
Driver of
Intended
Prosecution
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 23
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
Investigation and Procedure S.O. No. 44
Duty of a
Police Officer
Receiving a
Report of an
Accident



(iv) date, time and location of the accident;
(v) the name(s) and address(es) of witness(es);
(vi) the name(s) and address(es) of injured
person(s) and type of injuries sustained;
(vii) whereabouts of injured person(s);
(viii) damages to vehicle(s) and/or property;
(ix) circumstances surrounding the cause of the
accident;
(b) where necessary, despatch injured person(s) to a
Government Medical Institution for attention;
(c) warn the driver(s) of “intended prosecution”
according to law;
(d) In the case of the officer away from the Station:
(i) record the information at paragraph (a) in
his Pocket Diary;
(ii) mark the point of impact and position of
vehicle(s);
(iii) cause the vehicle(s) to be removed from the
roadway, in order to avoid unnecessary
obstruction;
(iv) refer the person(s) involved to the Police
Station in the District in which the accident
occurred;
(v) report the facts of the accident to the Second
Division Officer-in-charge of the Station
District in which the accident occurred;
(e) In the case of the officer at Station:
(i) record the information at paragraph (a) in
the Station Diary;
(ii) inform the Second Division Officer-in-
charge of the Station/Charge Room/Traffic
Section of the report.
24 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
S.O. No. 44 Investigation and Procedure



37. It shall be the duty of the Second Division Officer-in-charge
of the Station/Charge Room/Traffic Section, on receipt of the infor-
mation of an accident, to do the following:
(a) determine whether the accident is of a trivial or
serious nature;
(b) (i) detail an investigator;
(ii) In the case of a fatal accident or an accident
involving Police Vehicle(s) the investigator
shall be of the rank of Corporal and above;
(iii) where a Police Officer is involved in an accident
in his private or official capacity, the investi-
gator shall be senior in rank to him. However
the initial enquiry may be conducted by a Police
Officer of any rank;
(c) despatch the investigator to the scene of the
accident. However, if the accident is of a trivial
nature, the scene need not be visited;
(d) (i) despatch an investigator to the scene of all: 
fatal accidents; 
serious accidents;
accidents involving Government Vehicles and
Police Vehicles;
accidents involving Police Officers, whether in
their official or private capacity;
(ii) inform the area First Division Officer or area
Inspector of the action taken at paragraph (d)
(i) above.
(e) (i) submit within twenty-four (24) hours of the
occurrence, the details of all serious or fatal
accidents to the Assistant Commissioner
“Traffic” and Senior Superintendent “Traffic”
through the Officer in Charge of his Division;
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 25
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
Investigation and Procedure S.O. No. 44
Duty of a
Second
Division
Officer in
Charge of the
Charge Room/
Traffic Section
when an
accident is
reported



(ii) such report shall contain: 
(1) the facts of the accident;
(2) name, age and address of the victim(s); 
(3) action taken and the name of the
investigator; 
(4) the name of the institution, if hospitalised;
(f) ensure that the District Medical Officer, Inspecting
Engineer, Photographer and Funeral Agency are
requested to the scene of a fatal accident;
(g) where the accident occurs in another Station District
he shall—
(i) ensure that the facts of the accident are
transmitted to the appropriate Station. The
transmission should state whether statements
were recorded or the driver(s) warned;
(ii) refer the person(s) involved in the accident to
the relevant station.
38. The primary functions of an investigator in a Road Traffic
Accident are as follows:
(a) to give aid to the injured;
(b) record the facts; 
(c) ascertain whether there has been any contravention
of the Motor Vehicles and Road Traffic Laws.
39. A Police Officer detailed to investigate a Road Traffic
Accident, shall do the following:
(a) warn the driver(s) involved in the accident of
“Intended Prosecution” in accordance with the
instructions set out in paragraph 35 of this Order;
(b) (i) request the Driving Permit(s) of the driver(s)
and the Licence and Certificate of Insurance of
the vehicle(s) for the current year;
The primary
functions of
an investi-
gator in a
Road Traffic
Accident
Duty of the
Investigator
of a Road
Traffic
Accident
26 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
S.O. No. 44 Investigation and Procedure



(ii) record the following information: 
In relation to the Driving Permit:
the number;
date issued; 
expiry date; and
class of vehicle(s) the holder is entitled to
drive;
In relation to the Certificate of Insurance:
the number; 
date commenced; 
expiry date;
name of insurer; and
name of the insured.
In relation to the Licence:
the licence number; and the year for which
paid;
(c) visit the “scene” the same day of the report and:
(i) secure any evidence that may assist in the
investigation of the accident;
(ii) despatch injured person(s) to a Medical
Institution;
(iii) interview the driver(s) and witnesses;
(iv) take the following measurements:
(1) the width of the road; 
(2) the point of impact which must be pointed
out by the parties involved, e.g., driver(s) or
pedestrian, to the nearest side of the road-
way. When the parties concerned are not in
agreement with the point of impact
indicated by each other, record any
measurement or point of impact indicated
by each driver;
(3) any other measurements that are relevant
to the accident including skid marks,
brakes or tyre impressions;
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 27
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
Investigation and Procedure S.O. No. 44



(d) make an official record of the following:
(i) debris, which may assist in determining an
accurate point of impact;
(ii) the direction in which the vehicles, persons or
animals were travelling;
(iii) any other evidence which may assist in identi-
fying the cause of the accident;
(iv) record the extent of the damages to vehicle(s) or
property or injury to persons or animals;
(e) record statements from the driver(s) and witnesses.
In the case of a very serious accident in addition to the duties
from (a) to (e) above, he shall do the following:
(f) have the scene photographed, including the
vehicle(s) and property if necessary;
(g) cause the vehicles to be removed to the nearest
Police Station and prevent persons other than the
Inspecting Engineer from interfering with them;
(h) have the vehicle inspected by an Inspecting
Engineer from the Licensing Authority, within four
(4) days of the accident;
(i) return the vehicle to the owner, as soon as it has
been inspected and photographed.
In the case of a Fatal Accident in addition to the duties from (f)
to (i) above he shall do the following:
(j) cover the body of the victim;
(k) request the services of the District Medical Officer to
view and authorise the removal of the body;
(l) make efforts to have the body identified;
(m) secure any valuables found on the body of the victim
and lodge them with the Property Manager at
Station;
28 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
S.O. No. 44 Investigation and Procedure



(n) cause the body to be removed after the scene has
been photographed;
(o) request the services of a Funeral Agency for the
removal of the body to the mortuary;
(p) prevent persons from interfering with the body of
the victim;
(q) escort the body or cause it to be escorted by a Police
Officer to the mortuary;
(r) on his return to Station, report the facts of the
accident to the Second Division Officer-in-charge of
the Station/Charge Room/Traffic Section;
(s) record the facts of the accident in the Station Diary
and Road Traffic Accident Register;
(t) witness the post mortem on the body of the deceased
at the date and time given by the Government
Pathologist;
(u) record a statement from any relative or person who
at the post mortem identified the body;
(v) prepare a sketch plan where the scene has been
visited. See Appendix “M” for appropriate symbols;
(w) prepare and submit a file in accordance with instruc-
tions at paragraph 46(b) hereunder.
40. The Second Division Officer-in-charge of a Station/Charge
Room/Traffic Section, shall, immediately after the recording of the
particulars of a Road Traffic Accident in the Road Traffic Accident
Register, do the following:
(a) check the accuracy of the entries made in the register;
(b) code the accident in accordance with the specimen as
shown at Appendix “N”;
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 29
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
Investigation and Procedure S.O. No. 44
Duty of a
Second
Division
Officer in
charge with
respect to the
Road Traffic
Accident
Register



(c) cause the back of the “A” form to be ruled in accordance with
the specimen as shown at Appendix “O”;
(d) enter on the back of the “A” form in the space provided:
(i) the number, rank and name of the officer who
recorded the report and/or visited the scene and
investigated;
(ii) the submission of the “B” form to the Officer-in-
charge of Traffic Branch;
(iii) the handing over of the “C” form to the investi-
gator;
(iv) all other subsequent instructions, decisions and
movements of the file;
(e) sign the Road Traffic Accident Register in the
column provided;
(f) submit Part I of the “B” form to the Officer-in-charge
of Traffic Branch;
(g) handover the “C” form or Traffic Accident Case
Jacket to the investigator.
41. The Second Division Officer-in-charge of a Station/Charge
Room/Traffic Section, on completion of a Road Traffic Accident and
on receipt of final instructions into a report of a Road Traffic
Accident shall—
(a) fill out Part II of the “A” and “B” forms;
(b) if “No further Police Action” is directed, submit Parts
I and III of the “B” form to the Officer-in-charge of
Traffic Branch;
(c) in the case where prosecution was directed on
completion of the case, fill out Part III of the “A” and
“B” forms and submit the Part III of the “B” form to
the Officer-in-charge of Traffic Branch.
30 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
S.O. No. 44 Investigation and Procedure
Duty of a
Second
Division
Officer in
charge on
Completion of
an Accident
Investigation



POLICE VEHICLES INVOLVED IN ACCIDENTS
42. The driver of a Police Vehicle involved in a Road Traffic
Accident shall—
(a) report the accident in person at the Station in the
District, where the accident occurred on the same
day of the accident;
(b) accompany the investigator to the scene;
(c) prepare and submit the “Government Vehicle
Insurance Fund” form (G.V.I.) as shown at Appendix
“P” in triplicate and submit them together with his
report containing: the facts of the accident to the
officer in charge of the Division/Branch to which the
vehicle is posted within twenty-four (24) hours of
such accident.
43. The Officer in charge of the Division/Branch to which the
vehicle is assigned shall, on receipt of the triplicate copies of the
Government Vehicle Insurance Fund form and the report from the
driver of the vehicle involved in the Road Traffic Accident, sign the
Government Vehicle Insurance Fund forms and submit them
together with the driver’s report within forty-eight (48) hours to
the Officer in charge of the Division in which the investigation of
the accident is being conducted.
44. The Officer in charge of the Division in which the accident
is being conducted, on receipt of the documents mentioned above,
shall within forty-eight (48) hours prepare and submit a compre-
hensive covering report along with the documents to the Assistant
Commissioner in charge of “Mobile”.
45. The Assistant Commissioner “Mobile” on receipt of the
Government Vehicle Insurance Fund forms, shall within seven (7)
days transmit them to the Reinsurance Company of Trinidad and
Tobago Limited.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 31
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
Investigation and Procedure S.O. No. 44
Duties of the
driver of a
Police Vehicle
involved in
an accident
Duty of the
Officer in
charge of the
Division
where the
Vehicle is
posted
Duty of the
Officer in
charge of the
Division
Investigating
Duty of the
Assistant
Commis-
sioner
‘Mobile’



PROCEDURE FOR THE SUBMISSION OF ROAD
TRAFFIC ACCIDENT FILES
ACCIDENT INVOLVING MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC
46. Police Officers investigating Road Traffic Accidents
involving members of the public shall submit the completed files
within two (2) months of the occurrence of the accident:
(a) in the case of a trivial accident, to the Inspector in
charge who will deal with the matter finally;
(b) in the case of serious or fatal accidents, submit such
files to the area First Division Officer through the
Inspector in charge who must forward the files with
his recommendation(s).
A
CCIDENTS INVOLVING GOVERNMENT VEHICLES AND MEMBERS OF THE
PROTECTIVE SERVICES, D EFENCE FORCE IN THEIR OFFICIAL OR
PRIVATE CAPACITY
47. Investigators of accidents involving Government Vehicles
and members of the Protective Services/Defence Force, in their
official or private capacity, shall submit their files within ten (10)
days of the occurrence of the accident, to the Inspector in charge.
48. The Inspector in charge, shall submit the file to the Officer
in charge of the Division within fourteen (14) days of the
occurrence of the accident.
49. The First Division Officer-in-charge of the Division on
receipt of the file, shall:
(a) have all the statements in the file type written in
triplicate;
(b) prepare a comprehensive report in triplicate;
(c) attach a copy of the comprehensive report to each
type-written copy of the file;
Submission
by the
investigator
Submission
by the
investigator
Duty of the
Inspector in
charge or
Area
Inspector
Duty of the
First Division
Officer
32 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
S.O. No. 44 Investigation and Procedure



(d) submit two (2) copies of the file, with his recommen-
dation(s) to the Assistant Commissioner of Police
responsible for “Mobile” within twenty-eight (28)
days of the accident;
(e) retain a copy of the file at the Divisional
Headquarters;
(f) deal conclusively with the report of accidents involv-
ing drivers of Government Vehicles. In addition,
when submitting the files mentioned at paragraph (d)
to the Assistant Commissioner “Mobile”. He shall
indicate what action he has directed;
(g) in the case where he contemplates prosecution
against a member of the Protective Services/Defence
Force, whether in their official or private capacity, he
shall submit to the Assistant Commissioner “Mobile”
the original file, together with the documents
mentioned at paragraph (d).
A
CCIDENT INVOLVING POLICE VEHICLES AND POLICE OFFICERS IN
THEIR PRIVATE CAPACITY
50. Investigators of Road Traffic Accidents involving Police
vehicles and Police Officers in their private capacity shall submit
the completed file, within ten (10) days of the occurrence of the
accident to the Inspector in charge.
51. The Inspector in charge shall submit the file to the Officer
in charge of the Division within fourteen (14) days after the
occurrence of the accident.
52. The First Division Officer-in-charge of the Division shall—
(a) comply with instructions at paragraph 49(a)–(c);
(b) retain the hand written copy of the file;
Submission
by the
Investigator
Duty of the
Inspector in
charge or
Area
Inspector
Duty of the
First Division
Officer
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 33
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
Investigation and Procedure S.O. No. 44



(c) submit the original Road Traffic Accident jacket with
type written copies of the statements inserted in the
said jacket and two additional type written copies of
the file, including his recommendation(s) to the
Assistant Commissioner “Mobile” within twenty-one
(21) days of the accident;
(d) (i) on the return of the file mentioned at (d) above
he shall extract and file the type written
statements and simultaneously insert the
hand-written statements in the Traffic Accident
Case Jacket;
(ii) return the file to the investigator with his
instructions.
53. Where a Police Officer is involved in an accident in his
private capacity, the Officer in charge of the Division shall:
(a) where “No Further Police Action” is required, deal
conclusively with the matter;
(b) where there is evidence to prosecute the Police
Officer, submit the file with his recommendation(s)
through the Assistant Commissioner “Mobile” for the
decision of the Deputy Commissioner of Police.
A
CCIDENTS INVOLVING PERSONS SUBJECT TO
DIPLOMATIC IMMUNITY
54. (1) Accidents involving persons accorded immunities
under the Privileges and Immunities (Diplomatic, Consular and
International Organisation) Act, Chap. 17:01, shall be investi-
gated by a Police Officer of the rank of Sergeant and above.
(2) The investigator shall:
(a) comply with all the instructions given with
regard to the investigation of a Road Traffic
Accident;
(b) submit with in twenty-four (24) hours the
details of the accident by wireless/telephone to
the Assistant Commissioner “Mobile” and the
First Division Officer-in-charge of the Division;
Duty of the
First Division
Officer in the
case of Police
Officers in
their private
capacity
Investigation
34 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
S.O. No. 44 Investigation and Procedure



(c) submit the completed file to the Officer in
charge of the Division within seven (7) days of
the accident.
55. The Officer-in-charge of the Division, on receipt of the file
as mentioned at paragraph 54 (2)(c), shall submit it along with a
comprehensive report to the Assistant Commissioner “Mobile”
within fourteen (14) days of the accident.
P
ROSECUTION FOR ROAD TRAFFIC ACCIDENT
56. A Police Officer on receipt of instructions to prosecute shall:
(a) comply with instructions contained in Part I para-
graph 24 of this Order;
(b) where an information has been laid, as a result of an
accident involving Police Vehicles, Government
Vehicles, Police Officers and members of the
Protective Services and Defence Force in their
official and private capacity, the complainant shall
submit within twenty-four (24) hours to the Officer
in charge of the Division, the following information:
(i) Information Laid;
(1) Date information was laid;
(2) Information Number;
(3) Court of Hearing;
(4) Offence(s) for which charged;
(ii) Postponements: the date to which it has
been adjourned;
(iii) Decision—
(1) Date of decision;
(2) Magistrate’s Court;
(3) Name of the Magistrate;
(4) The findings of the Court;
(c) the Officer in charge of the Division, on receipt of the
information at paragraph (b) above, shall submit
within forty-eight (48) hours such information in
writing to the Assistant Commissioner “Mobile”.
Officer in
charge of the
Division
Prosecution
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 35
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
Investigation and Procedure S.O. No. 44



57. Police Officers investigating a Road Traffic Accident involv-
ing a bicycle are empowered to inspect the bicycle and test its
brakes, within forty-eight (48) hours of the accident either on a
road or on private premises with the consent of the owner of the
said premises.
58. The Second Division Officer-in-Charge of a Station/Traffic
Section/Charge Room, on receipt of a request for information
pertaining to a Road Traffic Accident from an authorised Legal
Representative or Issuance Company shall—
(a) supply brief particulars on payment of the appropri-
ate fee, supported by an official receipt;
(b) record the particulars in ink on the approved form in
duplicate as shown at Appendix “Q”. Where an
unusual number of vehicles are involved or a large
number of persons are injured, the additional
information shall be recorded on the back of the
form;
(c) supply particulars only if the Road Traffic Accident
is reported to the Police. Special enquiries shall not
be undertaken to secure such particulars;
(d) supply the particulars whether or not prosecution is
contemplated or an inquest is pending;
(e) supply the following particulars of the Road Traffic
Accident:
(i) date and hour of accident;
(ii) location of Road Traffic Accident;.
(iii) class and registration number of vehicles;
(iv) names and addresses of owners of vehicles;
(v) names and addresses and Driving Permit
particulars of drivers;
(vi) particulars of Certificate of Insurance of
vehicles;
(vii) brief details of damage to vehicles;
(viii) brief details of damage to property;
(ix) state whether a side car was attached or a
pillion rider thereon, if the vehicle was a
motor cycle;
(f) (i) deliver the original document to the applicant;
(ii) file the duplicate for future reference.
Road Traffic
Accident
involving
Bicycle—
section 36 of
Chap. 48:50
Supplying of
information
pertaining to
a Road Traffic
Accident
36 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
S.O. No. 44 Investigation and Procedure



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 37
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
Investigation and Procedure S.O. No. 44




38 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
S.O. No. 44 Investigation and Procedure




TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 39
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
Investigation and Procedure S.O. No. 44




40 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
S.O. No. 44 Investigation and Procedure




TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 41
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
Investigation and Procedure S.O. No. 44




42 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
S.O. No. 44 Investigation and Procedure




TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 43
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
Investigation and Procedure S.O. No. 44




44 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
S.O. No. 44 Investigation and Procedure




TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 45
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
Investigation and Procedure S.O. No. 44




46 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
S.O. No. 44 Investigation and Procedure




TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 47
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
Investigation and Procedure S.O. No. 44




48 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
S.O. No. 44 Investigation and Procedure




TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 49
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
Investigation and Procedure S.O. No. 44




50 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
S.O. No. 44 Investigation and Procedure




TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 51
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
Investigation and Procedure S.O. No. 44




52 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
S.O. No. 44 Investigation and Procedure




TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 53
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
Investigation and Procedure S.O. No. 44




54 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
S.O. No. 44 Investigation and Procedure




TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 55
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
Investigation and Procedure S.O. No. 44




56 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
S.O. No. 44 Investigation and Procedure




TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 57
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
Investigation and Procedure S.O. No. 44




58 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
S.O. No. 44 Investigation and Procedure




TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 59
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
Investigation and Procedure S.O. No. 44




60 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
S.O. No. 44 Investigation and Procedure




TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 61
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
Investigation and Procedure S.O. No. 44




62 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
S.O. No. 44 Investigation and Procedure




TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 63
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
Investigation and Procedure S.O. No. 44




64 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
S.O. No. 44 Investigation and Procedure




TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 65
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
Investigation and Procedure S.O. No. 44




66 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
S.O. No. 44 Investigation and Procedure




TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 67
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
Investigation and Procedure S.O. No. 44




68 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
S.O. No. 44 Investigation and Procedure




TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 69
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Control,
Investigation and Procedure S.O. No. 44
APPENDIX 'A1'
MOTOR  VEHICLES  AND  ROAD  TRAFFIC
(FIXED  PENALTY)  REGULATIONS 1979
FIXED PENALTY
Registration No. of Vehicle .........................................................................................................
Serial No. of Notice................................................................................................…..................
Date of Offence ............................................................................................................................
Amount of Penalty $ ...................................................................................................................
A Notice was affixed to this vehicle by No ................................................................................
Rank ............................................................................................................................................
Name ...........................................................................................................................................
Of ..........................................................................................................................Police Station
Signature of Constable ...............................................................................................................