TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
STANDING  ORDERS  41
POLICE FIREARMS AND AMMUNITION



Police Firearms and Ammunition
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
SECTION
PART  I
1. Firearms and Ammunition assigned to the Police Service
2. Police Armoury
3. Armourer
4. Executive Officer
5. Responsibility of the Officer in charge of the Armoury
6. Duties of an Armourer
7. Issue of Firearm and Ammunition
8. Registers
9. Responsibility of the Officer in charge of the Division/Branch/Section
10. Duty of the Second Division Officer in charge of the Station/Office
11. Duty of the Second Division Officer when issuing Firearms and
Ammunition
12. Duty of the Second Division Officer in charge of the Charge Room/Office
on return of Firearms and Ammunition
13. Duty of the Officer issued with Firearms and Ammunition
14. Relieving Officer Handing Over Firearm and Ammunition
15. Handing Over and/or Relieving Police Firearm
16. Discharge of Firearm
17. Loss of Firearms/Ammunition
18. Transfer of Firearms and Ammunition
19. General Guidelines
20. Replacement of ammunition issued
21. Conditions for returning Firearms/Ammunition
22. Instructions to Officer who served Notice
23. Retrieval of Firearms and Ammunition due to death
PART  II
24. Intepretation
25. Issue of Personal Protection Firearm and Ammunition
26. Duty of Second Division Officer against whom threats have been made
27. Duty of Second Division Officer in charge of the Station/Section/Branch/
Post
28. Duty of the Head of Division for Application of Personal Protection
—Firearm
29. Duty of First Division Officer appointed
30. Duty of the Head of Division
31. Responsibility of the Second Division Officer granted a Personal
Protection Issue
32. Duty of the Second Division Officer in charge
2 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 41 Police Firearms and Ammunition



1. Firearms and ammunition owned by the Government of
Trinidad and Tobago which are assigned to the Police Service shall
be stored at the Police Armoury and issued in such quantities to
individual Police Officers, Divisions/Branches/Sections/Stations
as the Commissioner of Police deems fit.
2. The “Police Armoury” hereinafter referred to as the
“Armoury” shall be under the supervision of a First Division
Officer.
3. “Armourer” refers to a Police Officer qualified to repair arms
and other component parts and appointed by the Commissioner of
Police to perform such duties.
4. The term “Executive Officer” in this Order refers to a First
Division Officer of the rank of Assistant Commissioner or above
under whose responsibility the Police Armoury falls.
5. The Officer in charge of the Armoury shall:
(a) ensure that there are adequate facilities for the
storage and security of firearms and ammunition;
(b) ensure that the duties of the Armourers are
effectively and efficiently carried out;
(c) ensure that the Armoury when open, is not left
unattended;
(d) ensure that the Armoury when closed, is properly
secured;
(e) Maintain such registers for:
(i) the recording of the purchase of firearms
and ammunition;
(ii) the issue and replacement of firearms and
ammunition to individual Police Officers,
Divisions/Branches/Sections/Stations;
(iii) maintenance and repairs of firearms issued
to the service;
(iv) the receipt, testing and return of firearms
and ammunition exhibits;
Firearms and
Ammunition
assigned to
the Police
Service
Police
Armoury
Armourer
Executive
Officer
Responsibility
of the Officer
in charge of
the Armoury
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 3
Police Firearms and Ammunition S.O. No. 41



(v) any other registers as may be deemed
necessary for the efficient management of
the Armoury;
(f) ensure that Branches/Sections/Stations throughout
the Service are visited by Police Armourers from
time to time;
(g) submit to the Executive Officer a monthly return of
visits to Branch/Section/Station carried out by the
Armourers;
(h) where upon any visit by any Armourer, a matter
requiring urgent attention is discovered, such
matter shall be immediately reported to the
Executive Officer;
(i) submit to the Executive Officer at least once a year,
a return of all firearms and ammunition requiring
Board of Survey approval for their disposal.
6. An Armourer shall—
(a) keep the firearms assigned to the Service in a
proper state of repair;
(b) visit Branches/Sections/Stations periodically and:
(i) examine the firearms and ammunition
issued to them;
(ii) check on the security arrangements for
storing firearms and ammunition and
make recommendations where necessary;
(c) submit a report of his findings to the Officer in
charge of the Armoury after each visit.
7. Firearms and ammunition assigned to the Police Service
shall be issued as follows:
(a) to Police Officers of and above the rank of Inspectors,
revolver/pistol;
(b) other Police Officers with special approval from the
Commissioner of Police, revolver/pistol;
(c) To Branches/Sections/Stations in such types and
quantities.
4 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 41 Police Firearms and Ammunition
Duties of an
Armourer
Issue of
Firearm and
Ammunition



8. (1) The First Division Officer in charge of a Division/Branch/
Section shall ensure that a “Firearms and Ammunition” Register
is opened and maintained at his Headquarters in which shall be
recorded the total amount of Firearms and Ammunition issued to:
(a) Stations;
(b) First Division Officers and Inspectors;
(c) other Police Officers with special approval from the
Commissioner of Police.
The register shall be drawn up in accordance with
Appendix “A” 1 and 2.
(2) The Second Division Officer in charge of Station/Office
shall ensure that the following registers are opened and
maintained:
(a) Firearm and Ammunition Register in which shall be
recorded the total amount of firearms and ammuni-
tion issued to that station drawn up in accordance
with Appendix “B”.
(b) The Daily Firearm and Ammunition Issue Register
which shall be drawn up in accordance with
Appendix “C” and used for the daily issue of
Firearms and Ammunition to Police Officers whilst
on duty.
9. The Officer in charge of Division/Branch/Section shall:
(a) ensure that adequate space with suitable security is
provided for the storage of all firearms and ammuni-
tion issued to Stations/Offices under his command;
(b) (i) submit to the Executive Officer responsible  for
the armoury by the seventh day after the end
of each quarter a return of all fire arms and
ammunition issued in his Division/Branch/Section.
(ii) the return shall be prepared in accordance with
Appendix “D”.
Registers
Responsibility
of the Officer
in charge of
the Division/
Branch/
Section
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 5
Police Firearms and Ammunition S.O. No. 41



10. It shall be the duty of the Second Division Officer in charge
of Station/Office, where firearms and ammunition are assigned to
do the following:
(a) check the firearms and ammunition before 10:00
a.m. each day and certify by an entry made in red
ink in the Station Diary the results of his findings;
(b) ensure that the facilities for the storage and
security of firearms and ammunition are efficiently
maintained in a state of repair;
(c) ensure that the firearms at Station are cleaned at
least once a week and an entry to that effect made in
the Station Diary;
(d) submit, within forty-eight (48) hours after the
completion of the Armourer’s visit, an extract of his
report to the Officer in charge of the
Division/Branch/Section;
(e) at the end of the month, where there has been a
change in the composition of the firearms and
ammunition issued to Station/Office, submit a
return to the Officer in charge of the
Division/Branch/Section indicating the change and
the reason for it.
11. It shall be the duty of the Second Division Officer when
issuing firearms and ammunition to:
(a) ensure that firearms and ammunition are issued
only to Police Officers on duty;
(b) ensure that an entry is made in the Firearm and
Ammunition Issue Register in accordance with the
specimen shown at Appendix “C”;
(c) ensure that an entry is made in the Station Diary
in which the description of the firearm and
ammunition is recorded in red ink;
Duty of the
Second
Division
Officer in
charge of the
Station/Office
Duty of the
Second
Division
Officer when
issuing
Firearms and
Ammunition
6 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 41 Police Firearms and Ammunition



(d) (i) ensure that the officer to whom the firearm and
ammunition is issued, makes an entry to that
effect in his Pocket Diary;
(ii) initial the entry made by the officer in his Pocket
Diary.
12. It shall be the duty of the Second Division Officer in charge
of Charge Room/Office on the completion of a tour of duty by a
Police Officer to whom a firearm and ammunition have been
issued to:
(a) ensure that such officer returns the identical firearm
and the correct quantity of rounds of ammunition;
(b) ensure that the officer to whom the firearm and
ammunition are returned, completes the “IN” option
of the Firearm and Ammunition Register as shown
at Appendix “C”;
(c) ensure that an entry of the return of the firearm and
ammunition is made in the Station Diary;
(d) ensure that a corresponding entry is made by the
officer returning the firearm and ammunition in his
Pocket Diary and initialled by the officer receiving
such firearm and ammunition;
(e) submit a report in writing to the Second Division
Officer in charge of Station/Office if it is discovered
that any discrepancy exist including the description
of the firearm and/or in the quantity of the ammuni-
tion returned.
13. It shall be the duty of a Police Officer issued with a firearm
and ammunition to do the following:
(a) affix his signature in the appropriate column in the
Firearm and Ammunition Issue Register on issue
and return of such firearm and ammunition;
(b) make an entry in his Pocket Diary on the issue and
return of such firearm and ammunition and obtain a
signature from the issuing and receiving officers;
(c) ensure that the firearms and ammunition are
secured against loss.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 7
Police Firearms and Ammunition S.O. No. 41
Duty of the
Second
Division
Officer in
charge of the
Charge
Room/Office
on return of
Firearms and
Ammunition
Duty of the
Officer issued
with Firearm
and
Ammunition



14. (1) Where a Police Officer is on duty and he is required to
hand over firearm and ammunition issued to him to a relieving
officer, both officers shall make entries in their respective Pocket
Diaries indicating the handing over thereof.
(2) Their Pocket Diaries shall be initialled by each other.
15. It shall be the duty of Police Officers when handing over or
receiving police firearms to do the following:
(a) (i) When handing over a loaded revolver to another,
the officer handing over will ensure that the
muzzle is held at a safety angle (45
O) off the heel
towards a vacant area: half break the weapon,
inform the receiving officer that the weapon is
loaded and permit him to see same and hand it
over to him in the same condition (half broken).
(ii) The receiving officer will keep the weapon
pointed at a safety angle, then close the revolver
keeping his finger clear off the trigger and put it
away.
(b) (i) When handing over a loaded rifle or S.M.G. the
weapon will be held at the small of the butt or
pistol grip in front of the body so that the muzzle
will be pointing uppermost and above the hand.
Remove the magazine, clear the mechanism and
leave the working parts open (i.e., the breech)
then hand over the weapon.
(ii) The receiving officer will hold the weapon at the
small of the butt or pistol grip, in front of the
body with the muzzle pointing uppermost and
above the head. In that position close the breech,
ease the trigger pressure, replace the filled
magazine on the weapon; keeping the finger
clear off the trigger and apply the safety catch.
Transfer of
Firearm and
Ammunition
General
Guidelines
8 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 41 Police Firearms and Ammunition



(c) (i) When handing over a loaded shotgun, the
weapon will be held with the muzzle pointing
uppermost; half break the weapon and inform
the receiving officer that the weapon is loaded
and permit the receiving officer to see same.
(ii) The receiving officer on taking over the shotgun,
will close the weapon (i.e., “make it”).
(d) When handing over unloaded firearms, they must at
all times be broken, proved and made available for
checking. In the case of rifles and submachine guns,
the working parts, i.e., bolt, breech, block and slide
must be left in the backward position, i.e., the breech
must be left open.
(e) Careless handling of firearms is strictly forbidden.
In the case of the revolver or pistol, it must always
be kept in the holster, except when drawn for
definite purposes such as to hand over, unload or to
protect the lives of persons in danger.
(f) Should it be suspected that a firearm is defective, the
matter must be immediately reported to the Second
Division Officer in charge or the next senior officer.
The defective weapon must not be used and should
be sent immediately with a report indicating the
defect to the Officer in charge of the Armoury
through the Officer in charge of the
Division/Branch/Section.
16. (1) It shall be the duty of a Police Officer who has
discharged a firearm to immediately report the facts in writing to
the Officer in charge of the Division/Branch/Section to which he is
attached.
(2) The Officer in charge of the Division/Branch/Section on
receipt of such correspondence referred to at (1) above shall:
(a) detail an officer senior in rank to the officer
discharging the firearm to investigate the circum-
stances surrounding the discharge of the firearm;
Discharge of
Firearm
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 9
Police Firearms and Ammunition S.O. No. 41



(b) report the matter immediately to the Assistant
Commissioner of Police responsible for the area;
(c) apply to the Executive Officer responsible for the
Armoury for replacement of spent ammunition;
(d) if necessary, have the firearm from which the
ammunition was discharged sent to the Officer in
charge of the Armoury for testing.
17. (1) It shall be the duty of a Police Officer who discovers
the loss or himself has lost a firearm/ammunition to report the
matter in writing immediately to the Officer in charge of the
Division/Branch/Section to which he is attached.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Officer in charge of the
Division/Branch/Section, on receipt of the report referred to at (1)
above to do the following:
(a) detail an officer of or above the rank of Inspector to
investigate the report;
(b) report the matter immediately to the Commissioner,
followed by a correspondence on the subject within
forty-eight (48) hours of the discovery of the loss;
(c) where necessary, apply to the Executive Officer
responsible for the Armoury for a replacement of the
firearm/ammunition.
18. It shall be the duty of the First Division Officer in charge of
a Division/Branch/Section to ensure that:
(a) no firearms/ammunition are to be transferred from
one Station/Branch/Section to another without the
approval of the Executive Officer in charge of the
Armoury; except in the case of an emergency
within his Division, in which case the transfer shall
not be for a period exceeding seventy-two (72) hours;
(b) whenever such transfer is authorised by the
Executive Officer in charge of the Armoury, the
relevant Firearm and Ammunition Registers are to
be updated.
10 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 41 Police Firearms and Ammunition
Loss of
Firearms/
Ammunition
Transfer of
Firearms and
Ammunition



19. The following guidelines shall be strictly adhered to by
Police Officers issued with firearms/ammunition or who is respon-
sible for the security of firearms/ammunition:
(a) All firearms/ammunition shall at all times be
properly secured.
(b) No repairs or alternations to firearms are to be
undertaken by Police Officers other than the
Armourers.
(c) Where firearms and/or ammunition is being trans-
ported, it shall be done under adequate armed
escort.
20. (a) (i) Ammunition issued to Division/Branch/
Section/Station shall be replaced in accordance
with the instructions shown hereunder:
Type of Ammunition Replacement Period
Rifle, Revolver, Pistol and S.M.G. 3 years from the date of issue to the Station
Shotgun Cartridges 2 years from the date of issue to the Station
(ii) It shall be the duty of the Second Division Officers
in charge of Station/Office to inform the Officer in
Charge of Division/Branch/Section of date
scheduled for replacement of his ammunition not
later than one month before the date scheduled for
replacement.
(iii) The Officer in charge of the Division/Branch/
Section, on receipt of the information mentioned at
(ii) above, shall make arrangement with the Officer
in charge of the Armoury to have the ammunition
replaced.
(iv) First Division Officers, Inspectors and Armourers,
on their visits/inspections to the Stations/Offices
are to pay special attention to the scheduled date
on which the above-mentioned ammunition are to
be replaced.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 11
Police Firearms and Ammunition S.O. No. 41
General
Guidelines
Replacement
of ammuni-
tion issued



(b) Police Officers who are issued with personal firearms
are to seek replacement of their ammunition in
accordance with the instructions mentioned at
paragraph (a)(i).
21. (1) Except otherwise instructed by the Commissioner of
Police, Police Officers issued with firearms and ammunition shall
return them to the Officer in charge of the Armoury under the
following circumstances:
(a) when proceeding on vacation leave in excess of
fourteen (14) days;
(b) when proceeding on pre-retirement leave or
resignation;
(c) in the case where the officer is served with a Notice
or Suspension, Interdiction or Dismissal, he shall
hand over his firearm and ammunition to the
officer serving such notice.
(2) Police Officers handing over their firearms and
ammunition under any of the circumstances mentioned at (1)
above, shall obtain a receipt for such firearm and ammunition
from the Receiving Officer.
22. The Police Officer who has served a Notice of Suspension,
Interdiction or Dismissal on a Police Officer issued with firearm
and ammunition, shall, on receipt of such firearm and ammuni-
tion do the following:
(a) issue him with a receipt for the firearm and
ammunition;
(b) take such firearm and ammunition to the Armoury
and obtain a receipt from the Armourer.
Conditions for
returning
Firearms/
Ammunition
Instructions
to Officer who
served Notice
12 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 41 Police Firearms and Ammunition



23. Where a Police Officer who has been issued personally with
a firearm and ammunition dies, the Officer in charge of the
Division/Branch/Section to which the deceased officer was
attached, shall be responsible for the immediate retrieval of such
firearm and ammunition and their return to the Officer in charge
of the Armoury who shall issue a receipt.
PART  II
P
ERSONAL PROTECTION ISSUE
24. “Personal Protection Issue” refers to a Firearm and
Ammunition issued to a Police Officer below the Rank of Inspector
in circumstances where threats have been made to the officers
and/or property (and/or his immediate family optional).
25. The Commissioner of Police shall approve the issue of a
Personal Protection Firearm and Ammunition and set out the
conditions under which the issue is applicable.
26. The Second Division Officer against whom threats have
been made shall—
(a) make an application for a personal protection issue;
(b) prepare a detailed report of the threats made includ-
ing the date, place, time and the name(s) and/or
address(es) of the person(s) making the threats (if
known) together with any documents in support
thereof;
(c) submit the application and report to the Senior
Second Division Officer in charge of the officer’s
Station/Branch/Section/Post.
27. (a) The Senior Second Division Officer in charge of the
Station/Section/Branch/Post shall cause an entry of
the report to be made in the station diary.
(b) Prepare a file and submit immediately to the First
Division Officer in charge of the area for onward trans-
mission to the head of the Division.
Retrieval of
Firearms and
Ammunition
due to Death
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 13
Police Firearms and Ammunition S.O. No. 41
Intepretation
Issue of
Personal
Protection
Firearm and
Ammunition
Duty of
Second
Division
Officer er
re: threats
Duty of
Second
Division
Officer in
charge of the
Station/
Section/
Branch/ Post



28. The Head of Division on receipt of the file shall appoint a
First Division Officer to investigate the threat and submit a
report within 72 hours of his appointment.
29. The First Division Officer so appointed shall—
(a) interview persons;
(b) request reports;
(c) prepare Threats Analysis Reports;
(d) monitor the “threats” after the issue to determine
whether the threats have abated or continue to
subsist.
30. The Head of Division shall within 24 hours of receipt of
the Report, forward it to the Commissioner of Police, with his
recommendations.
31. The Second Division Officer granted a personal protection
issue shall—
(a) produce the Firearm and Ammunition for inspection
on a daily basis;
(b) update the/Firearm and Ammunition Register on a
daily basis;
(c) cause an entry to be made in his pocket diary attest-
ing that he has complied with (a) and (b) above.
32. The Second Division Officer in charge shall ensure that the
Second Division Officer issued with a Personal Firearm comply
with the rules set out in the Standing Orders.
14 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 41 Police Firearms and Ammunition
Duty of the
Head of
Division on
receipt of file
Duty of First
Division
Officer
appointed
Duty of the
Head of
Division
Responsibility
of the Second
Division
Officer
Duty of the
Second
Division
Officer in
charge



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 15
Police Firearms and Ammunition S.O. No. 41



16 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 41 Police Firearms and Ammunition



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 17
Police Firearms and Ammunition S.O. No. 41



18 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 41 Police Firearms and Ammunition



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 19
Police Firearms and Ammunition S.O. No. 41



20 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 41 Police Firearms and Ammunition