TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
STANDING  ORDERS  50
MEDICAL BENEFIT AND SICK LEAVE PROCEDURE



Medical  Benefit  and  Sick  Leave  Procedure
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
SECTION
1. Medical Benefit
2. Sick Leave
3. Extended Sick Leave
4. Registered Medical Practitioner
5. Approved Registered Medical Practitioner
6. Hospitalization
7. Medical Board
8. Paternity Leave
9. Maternity Leave
10. Registers
11. Medical Benefit Entitlement
12. Reporting sick while on Duty
13. Medical Certificate Certification of
14. Sick Leave Fourteen (14) days entitlement
15. Application for Sick Leave
16. Tendering of Sick Leave Application
17. Responsibility of the Second Division Officer at a Station
18. Responsibility of the Second Division Officer in-charge-of the Charge Room
19. Responsibility of the First Division Officer
20. Reporting off Sick Leave
21. Habitual use of Sick Leave Entitlement
22. Submission of Sick Leave Return
23. Application
24. Tendering of Sick Leave
25. Receipt of Application
26. Acceptance of Applications
27. Reporting off Sick Leave abroad
28. Proceeding abroad whilst on Sick Leave
29. Sick Leave prior to or during Vacation Leave
30. Medical Treatment Abroad
31. Hospitalization
32. Reimbursement of cost of Medical Treatment
33. Maternity Leave Application for 
34. Submission of Leave Application
35. Still-Born
36. Injury sustained while on official duty
37. Procedure
38. Medical Board
2 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 50 Medical Benefit and Sick Leave Procedure



1. “Medical Benefit” refers to the provision by which free
dental, optical, hospital and medicinal treatment are granted to
Police Officers by a Government Medical Officer or at a
Government Medical Institution in Trinidad and Tobago.
2. “Sick Leave” refers to a period of absence due to illness.
3. “Extended Sick Leave” refers to that period of absence taken
as sick leave in excess of the annual sick leave entitlement.
4. “Registered Medical Practitioner” refers to a medical
practitioner who has been registered with the Medical Board of
Trinidad and Tobago under the provisions of the Medical Board
Act, Chap. 29:50.
5. “Approved Registered Medical Practitioner” refers to a
registered medical practitioner in the Service of the Government
of Trinidad and Tobago.
6. “Hospitalization” refers to that period of confinement for
treatment at a “Medical Institution”.
7. “Medical Board” refers to a Board appointed by the Minister
of Health for the medical examination of Police Officers.
8. “Paternity Leave” refers to a period of absence from duty
granted to a male Police Officer before and after the birth of his
child.
9. “Maternity Leave” refers to a period of absence from duty
granted to a female Police Officer before and after the birth of her
child.
10. (1) The Second Division Officer in charge of Station/
Section/Unit/Office shall keep and maintain the following
registers:
(a) Station Sick Leave Register: which shall be
drawn up in accordance with Appendix “A” wherein
shall be recorded—
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 3
Medical Benefit and Sick Leave Procedure S.O. No. 50
Medical
Benefit
Sick Leave
Extended Sick
Leave
Registered
Medical
Practitioner
Approved
Registered
Medical
Practitioner
Hospitaliza-
tion
Medical Board
Paternity
Leave
Maternity
Leave
Registers



(i) the period of sick leave taken by Police
Officers attached to that Station;
(ii) the date, time and place where such Police
Officers reported off sick leave;
(b) Sick Leave Application Receipt Register: which
shall record—
(i) all sick leave applications tendered at that
Station;
(ii) the name, address and signature of
the person tendering the application. This
register shall be drawn up in accordance
with the specimen shown at Appendix “B”.
(2) Division/Branch Sick Leave Register:
The Officer in charge of the Division/Branch shall open
and maintain a register known as the “Division/Branch
Sick Leave Register” in which shall be recorded the
sick leave taken by all Police Officers under his
command.
This register shall be drawn up in accordance with the
specimen shown at Appendix “C”.
11. (1) Police Officers on enlistment in the Service are entitled
to all medical benefits listed under Regulation 98 of the Police
Service Regulations, Chap. 15:01, provided that such benefits are
obtained from a Government Medical Officer or a Government
Medical Institution.
(2) However, for such benefits to be obtained from any
other Registered Medical Practitioner or from any Approved
Medical Institution, prior approval must be obtained from the
Commissioner of Police.
12. A Police Officer who reports sick while on duty shall
submit himself for a medical examination by a Registered Medical
Practitioner.
4 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 50 Medical Benefit and Sick Leave Procedure
Medical
Benefit
Entitlement
Reporting sick
while on Duty



13. Whenever a Medical Certificate is submitted, it shall be
certified by the applicant on the reverse side in accordance with
the specimen shown at Appendix “D”.
14. (1) Police Officers are entitled to fourteen (14) working
days sick leave per annum. Such sick leave shall be applied for in
writing.
(2) Where the Police Officer has not exhausted his fourteen
(14) days sick leave entitlement, any application for leave in
excess of two (2) days shall be accompanied by a medical certifi-
cate issued by a Registered Medical Practitioner.
(3) Where the Police Officer has utilized his sick leave
entitlement, every application for sick leave shall be accompanied
by a medical certificate issued by an Approved Registered Medical
Practitioner.
15. Applications for sick leave shall include the following:
(a) Number, Rank, Name and Signature of the Police
Officer applying;
(b) Date of application;
(c) Number of days applied for. The date of commence-
ment and expiration of such leave;
(d) Nature of complaint;
(e) Address where the officer can be located while on
sick leave;
(f) where a medical certificate is attached, it must be
mentioned in the application.
16. (1) A Police Officer applying for sick leave is required to
tender his application, either—
(a) in person; or
(b) by a bearer.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 5
Medical Benefit and Sick Leave Procedure S.O. No. 50
Medical
Certificate
Certification
of
Sick Leave
Fourteen (14)
days entitle-
ment
Application
for Sick
Leave
Tendering of
Sick Leave
Application



(2) POLICE OFFICER TENDERING APPLICATION  IN
PERSON
A Police Officer tendering an application for sick leave
in person shall—
(a) report his arrival to the Charge Room Sentry;
(b) record his arrival and the fact that he has
tendered an application in his Pocket Diary;
(c) obtain a signature in his Pocket Diary from the
Charge Room Sentry/Second Division Officer-
in-charge of the Charge Room;
(d) sign the “Sick Leave Application Receipt
Register”.
(3) POLICE OFFICER TENDERING APPLICATION BY
A BEARER
Whenever a Police Officer tenders an application for
sick leave by a bearer, he shall—
(a) advise the bearer that upon delivery of the
application he should sign the “Sick Leave
Application Receipt Register” and obtain a
receipt from the Charge Room Sentry/Second
Division Officer-in-charge of the Charge Room
receiving it;
(b) obtain the receipt mentioned at paragraph (a)
above from the bearer to be presented if and
when required by an officer senior in rank to
him.
17. The Second Division Officer at a Station/Post who receives
an application for sick leave shall— 
(a) record the arrival and departure of the person
tendering the application in the Station Diary and
the “Sick Leave Application Receipt Register”;
6 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 50 Medical Benefit and Sick Leave Procedure
Responsibility
of the Second
Division
Officer at a
Station



(b) request a signature from the person tendering the
application in the “Sick Leave Application Receipt
Register”;
(c) where the applicant tenders in person, initial his
Pocket Diary;
(d) in the case where a person other than the applicant
tenders, issue him with a receipt in accordance with
the specimen shown at Appendix “E” and inform him
to deliver it as soon as possible to the applicant;
(e) send a telephone/wireless message to the Second
Division Officer-in-charge of the Station/
Office/Section where the applicant is attached
informing him of the contents of the sick leave
application;
(f) deliver the sick leave application to the Second
Division Officer-in-charge of the Charge Room and
inform him of the action taken in connection with the
application.
18. The Second Division Officer-in-charge of the Charge Room,
on receipt of a sick leave application, shall—
(a) forward the application immediately with a Minute
to the First Division Officer-in-charge of the
Division/Branch/Section/Unit, to which the officer is
attached, indicating the following:
(i) the date and time the application was
tendered;
(ii) by whom tendered;
(iii) whether the Second Division Officer-in-
charge of the Station/Office to which the
applicant is attached was informed;
(b) where the applicant is attached to his Station, record
the contents in the “Station Sick Leave Register”.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 7
Medical Benefit and Sick Leave Procedure S.O. No. 50
Responsi-
bility of the
Second
Division
Officer-in-
charge of the
Charge Room



19. The First Division Officer-in-charge of a Division/
Branch/Section/Unit shall on receipt of an application for sick
leave do the following:
(a) where the applicant is attached to another
Division/Branch/Section/Unit, the application is
to be sent to that Division/Branch/Section/Unit
within twenty-four (24) hours of its receipt;
(b) where the applicant is attached to his Division/
Branch/Section/Unit—
(i) record the contents of the application in
the Divisional/Branch/Section/Unit Sick
Leave Register;
(ii) file the application in the applicant’s
Divisional Personal File;
(iii) in the case where the sick leave application
refers to extended sick leave—
(1) file a copy of the sick leave applica-
tion and medical certificate in the
applicant’s Divisional Personal
File;
(2) submit, within forty-eight (48)
hours of receipt to the Deputy
Commissioner of Police, the
original application and medi-
cal certificate together with a
“Detailed Calculation of Sick
Leave” taken by the officer
during that particular year.
The “Detailed Calculation”
shall only be submitted for each
officer with the first application
and medical certificate for
extended sick leave on the form
as shown at Appendix “T”.
20. (1) A Second Division Officer may report off sick leave at
any Police Station.
8 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 50 Medical Benefit and Sick Leave Procedure
Responsi-
bility of the
First Division
Officer
Reporting off
Sick Leave



(2) Whenever a Police Officer is reporting off sick leave he
shall—
(a) do so, not more than one half-hour after the corre-
sponding time to which he actually reported sick;
(b) make an entry in his Pocket Diary and tender it to
the Charge Room Sentry/Second Division Officer-in-
charge of the Charge Room for initialling;
(c) report to the Station/Office to which he is attached
within three (3) hours of reporting off sick leave, if he
is required for duty.
(3) Notwithstanding the above, a Police Officer reporting
off a period of continuous sick leave in excess of thirty (30) days
shall report and provide proof of his having submitted his appli-
cation for his entire period of absence—
(a) in the case of a First Division Officer, to the Deputy
Commissioner of Police;
(b) in the case of a Second Division Officer, to the First
Division Officer-in-charge of Administration Branch.
21. (1) Where a Police Officer is observed to have utilized his
sick leave entitlement in such a manner that it is  determined that
he has abused such entitlement, the Commissioner of Police may
direct him to submit himself for a medical examination by a
Government Medical Officer.
(2) The First Division Officer-in-charge of the Division/
Branch/Section/Unit, where the Police Officer is determined to
have used his sick leave entitlement in a manner mentioned at
sub-paragraph (1) above, shall—
(a) inform the Police Officer of his observation in
writing;
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 9
Medical Benefit and Sick Leave Procedure S.O. No. 50
Habitual use
of Sick Leave
Entitlement



(b) inform the Commissioner of Police in writing, where
the Police Officer after having been warned, contin-
ues to “habitually take advantage of the concession”
(Chap. 15:01, Regulation 88/2).
22. (1) The Second Division Officer-in-charge of a
Station/Office shall submit a monthly return of sick leave taken
by Police Officers under his supervision in the format as shown at
Appendix “G” to reach the Officer in charge of the
Division/Branch/Section/Unit not later than the second day of the
ensuing month.
(2) The Officer in charge of a Division/Branch/ Section/Unit
shall submit to the Deputy Commissioner of Police, not later than
the tenth day of the ensuing month, a monthly return of sick leave
taken by Police Officers under his command. This return shall
be drawn up in accordance with the format as shown at
Appendix “G”.
PROCEDURE FOR SICK LEAVE/EXTENDED SICK LEAVE
WHILE ON VACATION LEAVE OUTSIDE OF TRINIDAD
AND TOBAGO
23. (1) An application for sick leave or extended sick leave
by a Police Officer outside of Trinidad and Tobago shall be
accompanied by a medical certificate.
(2) Such application shall include the precise address
at which the Police Officer is residing abroad or if hospitalized,
the name and address of the medical institution at which he is a
patient.
24. Police Officers before proceeding on sick leave or extended
sick leave, shall tender an application for such leave or extended
sick leave at an Embassy, High Commission, Mission or the office
of any other duly appointed Representative of Trinidad and
Tobago for transmission to the Commissioner of Police.
25. The First Division Officer-in-charge of Administration
Branch shall—
10 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 50 Medical Benefit and Sick Leave Procedure
Submission of
Sick Leave
Return
Application
Tendering of
Sick Leave
Receipt of
Application



(a) where a copy of the application and medical certifi-
cate have been received through a “FAX”, by hand or
otherwise, file the document pending the receipt of
the original application and medical certificate from
the Embassy, High Commission, Mission or the office
of any other duly appointed Representative of
Trinidad and Tobago;
(b) on receipt of the original application and medical
certificate—
(i) in the case where the Police Officer has not
exceeded his sick leave entitlement submit
such application and medical certificate to
the Officer-in-charge of the Division/
Branch/Section/Unit to which the officer is
attached for inclusion in his Divisional
Personal File.
(ii) in the case where the Police Officer has
exceeded his sick leave entitlement—
(1) submit a copy of the application
and medical certificate to the
Officer in charge of the Division/
Branch/Section/Unit for inclusion
in the Police Officer’s Divisional
Personal File and request where
necessary a “Detailed Calculation
of Sick Leave” previously taken
by the officer in that particular
year;
(2) submit, as expeditiously as
possible to the Chief Personnel
Officer the details of the
application and medical
certificate.
26. On no account shall applications and medical certificates
for sick leave be accepted from Police Officers outside of the
country except submitted through the Embassy, High
Commission, Mission or the office of any other duly appointed
Representative of Trinidad and Tobago.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 11
Medical Benefit and Sick Leave Procedure S.O. No. 50
Acceptance of
Applications



27. Police Officers reporting off sick leave in the circumstances
mentioned at paragraph 23, shall report in person to the First
Division Officer-in-charge of Administration Branch.
28. Any Police Officer who desires to leave Trinidad and
Tobago during a period of sick leave, shall make an application to
the Commissioner of Police to do so, in order to obtain the
necessary approval.
29. (1) A Police Officer who proceeds on sick leave im-
mediately prior to his annual vacation leave may have such
vacation leave deferred.
(2) A Police Officer, who is certified ill during his annual
vacation 1eave, shall submit an application together with the
medical certificate for the period of illness in order to have such
period classified as sick leave, indicating at the same time
whether he wishes to resume his vacation leave on the expiration
of the sick leave or have such period credited to his vacation leave
eligibility.
30. (1) A Police Officer who is ill and is desirous of being
treated abroad because treatment for his ailment cannot be
obtained locally, shall have such overseas treatment recom-
mended by the Director of the Government Medical Institution
concerned in Trinidad and Tobago indicating that the treatment is
unavailable locally.
(2) The application for permission to proceed abroad for
medical attention must be accompanied by the recommendation
referred at subparagraph (1) above and shall be made to the
Commissioner of Police in order that approval be obtained from
the Chief Personnel Officer.
(3) Notwithstanding the above, permission to proceed
abroad for medical treatment does not commit the Government
of Trinidad and Tobago to meet payments incurred in this
connection.
Reporting off
Sick Leave
abroad
Proceeding
abroad whilst
on Sick Leave
Sick Leave
prior to or
during
Vacation
Leave
Medical
Treatment
Abroad
12 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 50 Medical Benefit and Sick Leave Procedure



31. (1) A Police Officer who is absent from duty due to
hospitalization shall account for such absence as sick leave.
(2) In the case where the “hospitalized” Police Officer has
not exhausted his sick leave entitlement for the year, sick leave
taken in excess of two (2) days shall be accounted for by a medical
certificate.
(3) In the case where the “hospitalized” Police Officer has
exceeded his sick leave entitlement for the year, any sick leave
taken shall be accounted for by a medical certificate.
32. (1) Where a Police Officer has received treatment or
medicines which are not readily available from a Government
Medical Officer or Institution, he shall be reimbursed the reason-
able cost of such treatment or medicines purchased, provided that
the prior approval of the Commissioner of Police was obtained.
33. (1) Maternity Leave shall be granted upon application, to
female Police Officers who have served for a period of not less
than one year as at the date of commencement of the leave.
(2) Such leave shall be granted in the following manner:
(a) one month with full pay before the expected date of
birth of the child;
(b) two months on half pay after the birth of the child.
(3) The application for maternity leave shall be
accompanied by a medical certificate from a Registered Medical
Practitioner indicating the expected delivery date of birth of the
child.
34. (1) The application and medical certificate shall be
submitted to the Officer in charge of the Division/Branch/Section/
Unit to which the female Police Officer is attached and should
reach him at least three months before the expected delivery date
of the birth of the child.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 13
Medical Benefit and Sick Leave Procedure S.O. No. 50
Hospitaliza-
tion
Reimburse-
ment of cost
of Medical
Treatment
Maternity
Leave
Application
for 
Submission of
Leave
Application



(2) The Officer in charge of the Division/Branch/
Section/Unit shall submit such application and medical certificate
immediately to the Deputy Commissioner of Police.
35. (1) In the case where a female Police Officer has given birth
to a still-born child, such officer shall not be entitled to two (2)
months maternity leave which normally follows the birth of a
child.
(2) The leave taken by a female Police Officer in connection
with this birth shall be dealt with as sick leave.
36. Whenever a Police Officer is injured in the performance of
his official duty, the procedure hereunder shall be adopted:
(a) the Second Division Officer-in-charge of the Station
where the report was made, shall—
(i) immediately inform the Officer in charge of
his Division;
(ii) submit to the Officer in charge of his
Division within twenty-four (24) hours of
the report made in the Station Diary an
extract of such report;
(iii) in the case where the injured officer is not
attached to that Division, inform the First
Division Officer under whose command the
injured officer is presently serving;
(b) the First Division Officer on receipt of the informa-
tion, shall, where necessary, detail an officer senior
in rank to the injured officer to investigate the
circumstances surrounding the injury;
(c) the injured officer shall submit a report to the
Officer in charge of his Division/Branch/Section/
Unit within three (3) days of sustaining the injury;
(d) the First Division Officer-in-charge of the Division/
Branch/Section/Unit, on receipt of the report from
the injured officer, shall—
14 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 50 Medical Benefit and Sick Leave Procedure
Still-Born
Injury sus-
tained while
on official
duty



(i) place a copy of the report in the injured
officer’s Divisional Personal File;
(ii) send the original report to the Officer in
charge of the Division where the report is
being investigated;
(e) the officer detailed to investigate the report shall
within twenty-one (21) days of being detailed
submit his completed investigation to the First
Division Officer-in-charge of his Division;
(f) the First Division Officer-in-charge of the Division
on receipt of the completed investigation shall—
(i) direct the action to be taken;
(ii) submit within seven (7) days of receipt to
the Deputy Commissioner for inclusion in
the injured officer’s “Personal File”, a copy
of the entire investigation which should
include a covering report indicating what
action was taken and the original report
and medical certificate of the injured
officer.
EXEMPTION  DUE  TO  MEDICAL CONDITION
37. (1) A Police Officer who is certified by a Registered Medical
Practitioner to be suffering from a medical condition and recom-
mended for an exemption shall submit an application with the
Medical Certificate to—
(a) in the case of a First Division Officer, to the Deputy
Commissioner of Police;
(b) in the case of a Second Division Officer, to the Officer
in charge of the Division/Branch/Section/Unit to
which he is attached.
(2) The application and medical certificate shall be
tendered by the officer at the Division/Branch/Section/Unit
Headquarters or the Station/Office to which he is attached.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 15
Medical Benefit and Sick Leave Procedure S.O. No. 50
Procedure



(3) Where the exemption granted to a Police Officer is in
excess of ninety (90) consecutive days, on the expiration of the
first ninety (90) days and every successive ninety (90) days there-
after, he shall revisit the attending physician, in order to have his
medical condition reviewed and obtain certification of his present
condition.
(4) The reviewed certificate so obtained shall be submitted
within twenty-four (24) hours of the period set aside for review (90
days). In the case of a First Division Officer to the Deputy
Commissioner of Police and in the case of a Second Division
Officer, to the Officer in charge of the Division/Branch/
Section/Unit to which the officer is attached.
(5) The application and medical certificate of exemption,
together with every reviewed certificate of exemption shall be
filed in the officer’s Divisional Personal File and entered on the
“Medical Exemption Form” as shown at Appendix “H”.
38. (1) Whenever it is necessary to ascertain whether or not a
Police Officer should be retired on grounds of ill health, he shall
be examined by a Medical Board.
(2) A Police Officer, who is on a prolonged period of illness
or has been examined by a Government Medical Officer based on
the recommendations of the Commissioner of Police and certified
to be ill, where such illness affects the performance of his duty,
shall be placed before a Medical Board on the recommendation of
the Commissioner of Police.
(3) A Police Officer, who is directed by the Commissioner of
Police to undergo a medical examination by a Medical Board shall
attend at the time and place mentioned in the directive.
16 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 50 Medical Benefit and Sick Leave Procedure
Medical
Board



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 17
Medical Benefit and Sick Leave Procedure S.O. No. 50



18 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 50 Medical Benefit and Sick Leave Procedure




TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 19
Medical Benefit and Sick Leave Procedure S.O. No. 50




20 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 50 Medical Benefit and Sick Leave Procedure




TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 21
Medical Benefit and Sick Leave Procedure S.O. No. 50




22 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 50 Medical Benefit and Sick Leave Procedure




TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 23
Medical Benefit and Sick Leave Procedure S.O. No. 50




24 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 50 Medical Benefit and Sick Leave Procedure
