TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
STANDING  ORDERS  52
BOOKS,  REGISTERS,  PUBLICATIONS AND RECORDS



Books, Registers, Publications and Records
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
SECTION
1. Records to be kept
2. Permanent Records
3. Financial Records
4. Register of the Service
5. Books to be Retained
6. Records to be kept in a serviceable condition
7. Destruction of Books, Registers, Records and Publications
8. Station Information File
2 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 52 Books, Registers, Publications and Records



1. Books, Registers, Records and Publications shall be kept at
Divisions/Branches/Stations/Sections/Units/Offices for use by
members of the Service.
2. The following Books and Records shall be kept
permanently at Divisions/Branches/Stations/Sections/Units/
Offices:
(a) Laws of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago.
(b) Standing Orders of the Trinidad and Tobago Police
Service.
(c) Trinidad and Tobago Gazettes and Supplements.
(d) Part 11 of Departmental Orders.
(e) Part 11 of Divisional Orders.
(f) Register of Completed Books.
(g) Station Standing Orders.
(h) Rogues Gallery and Album.
(i) Station Information File.
3. The Financial and Accounting Records of the Service
shall be preserved in accordance with instructions laid down
in the Financial Regulations of the Exchequer and Audit Act,
Chap. 69:01, sections 135 and 136.
4. The Registers required to be kept by the Standing Orders
shall be preserved for a period of five (5) years after completion
with the exception of the undermentioned which shall be           pre-
served for a period of three (3) years after completion:
(a) Telephone Message Book.
(b) First Division Officer’s Visit and Inspection Book.
(c) Inspector’s Visit and Inspection Book.
(d) Correspondence Registers excluding the major
correspondence register.
(e) Patrol Registers.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 3
Books, Registers, Publications and Records S.O. No. 52
Records to be
kept
Permanent
Records
Financial
Records
Register of
the Service



(f) Attendance Register.
(g) inventory of Office Furniture Register.
(h) Register of Persons in custody.
(i) Domestic Violence Protection and Interim Orders
Register.
5. Notwithstanding the instructions contained at paragraph 3,
no Books, Registers or Records shall be destroyed where any
matter contained therein is under investigation or pending in
Court/Disciplinary Tribunal until the final determination of such
matters.
6. It shall be the responsibility of the Second Division Officer
in charge of Station/Office to ensure that all Books, Records,
Registers and Publications be kept and maintained in a
presentable and serviceable condition.
7. (1) It shall be the responsibility of an Officer in charge of a
Division/Branch/Section/Unit to detail a First Division Officer
under his command to destroy any book, record or register which
has become due for destruction.
(2) It shall be the duty of a First Division Officer destroying
any record book or register referred to at (1) above, to make an
entry to this effect in the Register of Completed Books.
8. The Second Division Officer in charge of a Station, shall
keep a file in which shall be recorded, where applicable, the
following information relating to the Station and District,
namely:
(a) Sanctioned strength of Station;
(b) Boundaries of Station District;
(c) Area of Station District in metres;
(d) Population of District;
(e) List of Churches with denominations;
4 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 52 Books, Registers, Publications and Records
Books to be
Retained
Records to be
kept in a
serviceable
condition
Destruction of
Books,
Registers,
Records and
Publications
Station
Information
File



(f) List showing names, addresses and telephone num-
bers of District Medical Officers and other doctors;
(g) List of Justices of the Peace with addresses and tele-
phone numbers;
(h) List of Estate Constables with addresses and tele-
phone numbers, if any;
(i) List of Schools, denominational and Government;
(j) The number of—
(i) Proprietary Clubs;
(ii) Members’ Clubs;
(iii) Cinemas;
(iv) Spirit Retailers;
(v) Spirit Dealers;
(vi) Spirit Grocers;
(vii) Wine and Beer Retailers;
(viii) Restaurants;
(ix) Hotels;
(x) Special hotels;
(xi) Pawnbrokers;
(xii) Dealers in Precious Metals and Stones;
(xiii) Old Metal and Marine Store Dealers;
(xiv) Produce Dealers;
(xv) Gunsmiths;
(xvi) Firearms’ Dealers;
(xvii) Ammunition and Explosives’ Dealers;
(xviii) Sawmills;
(xix) Number of Licensed Shotguns;
(xx) Number of Licensed Revolvers and Pistols;
(xxi) Number of Licensed Rifles;
(xxii) Any other business place or person of
importance to the Police.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 5
Books, Registers, Publication and Records S.O. No. 52