TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
STANDING  ORDERS  51
PROCEDURE FOR DEALING WITH REPORTS OF
MISSING PERSONS



Procedure  for  dealing  with  Reports  of
Missing Persons 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
SECTION
1. Missing Persons
2. Register
3. Duty of a Police Officer receiving Report
4. Responsibility of the Second Division Officer-in-charge of Station/Criminal
Investigation Department Office/Anti-Kidnapping Squad
5. Duty of the Investigator
6. Responsibility of the Divisional Criminal Investigation Department Office
7. Circulation and Publication
8. Cancellation/Closure.
9. Guidelines for dealing with a report of Kidnapping
10. Duties of the Officer in charge of the Anti-Kidnapping Squad
2 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Procedure for dealing with Reports of
S.O. No. 51 Missing Persons



1. “Missing Person” refers to a person who has not been seen
or heard from for a period in excess of twenty-four (24) hours and
is reported missing by a person interested in or responsible for
that other person’s welfare.
2. (1) The Second Division Officer-in-charge of a Station and a
Divisional Criminal Investigations Department Office, where
such office is situated independent of the Station, shall open and
maintain a register known as the “Missing Person Register”.
(2) The pages of this register shall be prepared in quadru-
plicate and drawn up in accordance with the specimen as shown
at Appendix “A”.
(3) All columns of the register are to be filled in. However,
special attention must be paid to the columns explained
hereunder:
(a) in the column marked—enter the total number of
reports received at the
Station/Office for the year
to date;
(b) in the column marked—enter the total number of
reports of missing persons
received at the
Station/Office for the
month to date;
(c) in the column marked—enter the total number of
reports of missing persons
received at a Divisional
Criminal Investigations
Department for the month
to date;
(d) in the column marked—enter the total number of
reports of missing persons
received at Criminal
Records Office for the
month to date;
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 3
Procedure for dealing with Reports of
Missing Persons S.O. No. 51
“No”
“Station MS”
“D.D.O.M.S”
“C.R.O.M.S”
Missing
Persons
Register



(e) in the column marked—enter the reference number
of the Criminal Records
which the description of the
missing person was pub-
lished;
(f) in the column marked—enter the date and reference
number of the Criminal
Records Office Circular in
which the “cancellation” of
the missing person was
published.
3. A Police Officer who receives a report of a missing person
shall—
(a) record the report in the Station Diary which should
include—
(i) the name and address of the person
making the report;
(ii) the name, address and description of the
missing person;
(iii) a description of the clothes the missing
person was wearing when last seen;
(iv) when and where the missing person was
last seen;
(v) places or relatives frequently visited by the
missing person;
(b) obtain a photograph of the missing person where
practicable;
(c) inform the Second Division Officer-in-charge of the
Station/Criminal Investigations Department Office
and the Officer in charge of the Anti-Kidnapping
Squad;
(d) transmit the description of the missing person to the
Second Division Officer-in-charge of the Police
Control for circulation throughout the Service;
Duty of a
Police Officer
receiving
Report
4 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Procedure for dealing with Reports of
S.O. No. 51 Missing Persons
“C.R.O. Circular
Reference”
“Date cancellation
Published”



(e) enter the report in the “Missing Person Register” in
quadruplicate.
4. The Second Division Officer-in-charge of Station/Criminal
Investigations Department Office/Anti-Kidnapping Squad shall—
(a) on receipt of the information of a missing person,
appoint an investigator;
(b) ensure that the description of the missing person is
circulated within the Service;
(c) ensure that, within forty-eight (48) hours of the
receipt of the report—
(i) the original form of the Missing Person
Register is submitted to the Criminal
Records Office;
(ii) the duplicate, to the Divisional Criminal
Investigations Department Office;
(d) submit by the second day of each month, a return of
missing persons showing the status of each out-
standing report and those that have been
completed during the previous month to the Officer
in charge of the Divisional Criminal Investigations
Department.
5. The Police Officer detailed to investigate a report of
missing person shall—
(a) ensure that all relevant information is recorded in
the “Missing Person Register”;
(b) disseminate the “Missing Person Register” forms as
follows:
(i) the original, to the Officer in charge of
Criminal Records Office, within forty-eight
(48) hours of receipt of the report;
(ii) the duplicate, to the Officer in charge of
the Criminal Investigations Department
within forty-eight (48) hours of receipt of
the report.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 5
Procedure for dealing with Reports of
Missing Persons S.O. No. 51
Responsibility
of the Second
Division
Officer-in-
charge of
Station/
Criminal
Investigations
Department
Office/Anti-
Kidnapping
Squad
Duty of the
Investigator



(iii) the triplicate, to be retained by him and
form part of his missing person investiga-
tion file;
(iv) the quadruplicate, to remain in the
register;
(c) record, on the upper portion at the back of each form
any previous history of unaccounted absence in
excess of twenty-four (24) hours;
(d) record, on the lower portion at the back of the
quadruplicate beneath the history of the missing
person the “Action Taken” by the investigator when
investigating the report. The “Action Taken”
column should be headed as shown hereunder:
Date Time Action Taken
(e) where the missing person has been located, he shall—
(i) interview that person and record a state-
ment from him;
(ii) fill out the relevant portion of the quadru-
plicate in the register and the triplicate in
his possession;
(iii) submit, within forty-eight (48) hours of
locating the missing person, the file to the
Officer in charge of the Divisional Criminal
Investigations Department;
6 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Procedure for dealing with Reports of
S.O. No. 51 Missing Persons



(iv) whereafter a period of one year, the
missing person has not been located,
submit the Missing Person File with a
covering report, to the Officer in charge of
the Divisional Criminal Investigations
Department for filing;
(v) where information is received that the
missing person has been kidnapped, the
Anti-Kidnapping Squad must be informed.
6. The Officer in charge of the Divisional Criminal
Investigations Department shall—
(a) on receipt of the duplicate form of the Missing
Person Register, open and maintain a file on that
report;
(b) supervise the investigation of the report;
(c) on receipt of the file, where a person has been
located—
(i) update the file kept at his office in respect
to the missing person;
(ii) submit to the Officer in charge of the
Criminal Records Office the information
concerning the fact that the missing
person has been located;
(iii) instruct, where a crime has been
disclosed, the action required to be taken; 
(iv) cause the report in the Missing Person
Register to be cancelled/closed.
(e) on receipt of a file, where a missing person has
not been located for over a period in excess of one
year, he shall preserve such file pending further
development;
(f) on receipt of the monthly return from each Station,
collate the returns and submit, by the seventh day of
each month, a summary of such returns to the
Officer in charge of Criminal Records Office.
Responsibility
of the
Divisional
Criminal
Investigations
Department
Office
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 7
Procedure for dealing with Reports of
Missing Persons S.O. No. 51



7. (1) The Officer in charge of Criminal Records Office, shall
submit to the Assistant Commissioner of Police responsible for
Crime, a photograph, description and pertinent information of
any missing person which he thinks should be circulated through
the news media.
(2) Publish the description of all missing persons in the
Criminal Records Office Circular and the cancellation of any such
report.
8. (1) A “Missing Person” report shall be cancelled/closed only
on the written instructions of a First Division Officer.
(2) (a) A report is “cancelled” when a missing person has
been located and a criminal offence is disclosed.
(b) A report is “closed” when a missing person has been
located and no criminal offence is disclosed.
(3) To cancel/close such a report the following shall be done:
(a) draw a red diagonal line from the top right hand
corner to the bottom left hand corner of the
quadruplicate form in the Missing Person Register;
(b) write the word “Cancelled/Closed” in red ink along
the said line;
(c) insert beneath the diagonal red line, the signature of
the officer cancelling/closing the report and the date
on which the report is cancelled/closed.
9. Where a report of Kidnapping is received, the officer receiv-
ing the report shall ascertain—
(a) the name of the person kidnapped;
(b) the time of the alleged kidnapping;
(c) the place where the kidnapped person was last
seen;
8 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Procedure for dealing with Reports of
S.O. No. 51 Missing Persons
Circulation
and
Publication
Cancellation/
Closure
Guidelines for
dealing with
a report of
Kidnapping
Duties of the
Officer in
charge of the
Anti-
Kidnapping
Squad



(d) a brief description of the kidnapped person;
(e) all the information necessary for the proper identifi-
cation of the kidnapped person;
(f) the information as at (a)-(c) above must be
forwarded to the Officer in charge of the Anti-
Kidnapping Squad.
10. The Officer in charge of the Anti-Kidnapping Squad
shall—
(a) detail members of the Squad to investigate the
kidnapping;
(b) ensure that the information is circulated throughout
the Service; 
(c) inform the Senior Superintendent in charge of
Criminal Investigation Department and Criminal
Records Office of the report and any action taken.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 9
Procedure for dealing with Reports of
Missing Persons S.O. No. 51
Duties of the
Officer in
charge of the
Anti-
Kidnapping
Squad



10 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Procedure for dealing with Reports of
S.O. No. 51 Missing Persons



TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 11
Procedure for dealing with Reports of
Missing Persons S.O. No. 51




12 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
Procedure for dealing with Reports of
S.O. No. 51 Missing Persons
