TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
STANDING  ORDERS  55
GOVERNMENT POWDER MAGAZINE



Government Powder Magazine
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
SECTION
1. Definition
2. Responsibility of Head of Division
3. Duty of Head of Division
4. Appointment of Magazine Keeper
5. Security of Powder Magazine Facility
6. Safety procedures and measures to be instituted
7. Business Hours
8. Communication
9. Miscellaneous
2 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 55 Government Powder Magazine



1. “Powder magazine” refers to a facility secured and protected
by the police wherein explosives and explosive devices are stored.
2. The Head of the Division in which a Powder Magazine facility
is established shall be responsible for the security, protection and
physical maintenance of the facility.
3. The Head of Division in whose Division a Powder Magazine
Facility is established shall—
(a) appoint a First Division Officer in his Division to be
the magazine keeper;
(b) deploy a sufficient strength to provide twenty-four
(24) hour security at the Powder Magazine Facility;
(c) ensure that the officers on duty are provided with
the equipment and accessories to effectively protect
and secure the facility;
(d) ensure that appropriate safety procedures are insti-
tuted and enforced at the facility;
(e) ensure emergency procedures are developed in
conjunction with the users of the facility;
(f) visit the Magazine once per month and examine the
records at the facility;
(g) submit to the Commissioner of Police a written
report of any incident or concern of such incident.
4. The First Division Officer appointed as Magazine Keeper
shall—
(a) detail a Second Division Officer to be Assistant
Magazine Keeper, who, in his absence shall have all
the power and authority attributed to him by this
Order;
(b) cause to be opened two registers, namely, the Powder
Magazine Facility Visit Register and the Explosive
and Explosive Devices Register;
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 3
Government Powder Magazine S.O. No. 55
Definition
Responsibility
of Head of
Division
Duty of Head
of Division
Appointment
of Magazine
Keeper



(c) ensure the registers are correctly written up;
(d) be responsible for the guards at the facility;
(e) ensure that explosives are properly stored within the
facility;
(f) ensure that he complies with the Magazine
Regulations made under section 8 of the Explosive
Act, Chap. 16:02 (Importation, Storage, etc., of
Dynamite Regulations 13);
(g) submit a return (in duplicate) on the approved form
by  the fifth (5th) day of each quarter to the Head of
Division. The original shall be forwarded to
Commissioner and the Head of the Divisions shall
retain the duplicate;
(h) the return shall set out:
(i) the names and addresses, place of opera-
tion of each supplier/operator;
(ii) the stock on hand for each supplier/
operator;
(iii) the total stock received and issued for pre-
vious quarter from ............... to ..................;
(iv) an explanation where excesses or shortage
are discovered.
5. The Second Division Officer detailed to provide security at
the Powder Magazine Facility shall—
(a) ensure that the perimeter of the facility is checked
every hour paying special attention to determine:
(i) whether there are any leaks or corroded
explosives or accessories;
(ii) moisture or intrusion of water into any of
the storage facilities of the magazine;
(iii) any unauthorised entry or pilferage,
whether there is any dried grass or other
combustible material in the immediate
vicinity of the facility. 
4 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 55 Government Powder Magazine
Security of
Powder
Magazine
Facility



(b) ensure unauthorised persons do not enter the
compound;
(c) provide hourly reports to the Head of the Division
via the Police Control or Sub-Control on the status of
the facility. The reports shall indicate:
(i) the weather conditions at present;
(ii) the names and ranks of the visiting
officers (if any);
(iii) the general status of the area;
(iv) any matter requiring the magazine
keeper’s immediate attention;
(d) ensure those entries with respect to the directions at
para (c) are entered in the Station Diary and other
relevant registers;
(e) ensure that persons entering the facility do not:
(i) smoke in any part of the facility;
(ii) wear clothes with pockets;
(iii) wear shoes with iron or steel therein;
(iv) introduce any lucifer matches or any
artificial lighting or any substance or
article likely to cause explosion or fire or
any iron, steel regrit;
(f) turn on and off the light daily;
(g) ensure that the emergency lights are functioning
and in event of a malfunction, immediately inform
the magazine keeper or the assistant keeper;
(h) ensure the fuel tanks contain sufficient fuel. Where
there is a need for fuel, immediately inform the
magazine keeper and make an entry to this effect in
the Station Diary.
6. The following safety procedures and measures shall be
instituted at a Powder Magazine Facility:
(a) the facility is to be fenced with gates to allow for
ingress and egress of the facility;
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 5
Government Powder Magazine S.O. No. 55
Safety pro-
cedures and
measures to
be instituted



(b) the perimeter of the facility is to be illuminated so as
to ensure that visibility is clear throughout;
(c) the gates shall be locked at all times except to allow
ingress or egress;
(d) the keys to the guard post and the gates shall be
kept by the Senior Second Division Officer on duty
and shall be handed over to his relief on the comple-
tion of each tour of duty. An entry to this effect shall
be made in the Station Diary and the respective offi-
cers’ pocket diaries;
(e) all forms of radio communication shall be switched
off before entering the perimeter fence and remain
unused whilst inside the enclosed area;
(f) persons entering and leaving the enclosed area shall
be searched;
(g) water tanks shall be installed and replenished twice
weekly;
(h) two (2) generators shall be installed to supply
electricity to the facility. They shall be operated
alternately from 7.00 p.m. to 7.00 a.m. each night.
7. (1) Explosives shall be received into the facility between the
hours of 7.00 a.m. and 6.00 p.m. on each working day.
(2) Deliveries will be made between the hours of 7.00 a.m.
and 12.00 noon.
(3) Explosives shall not be received or delivered during a
thunder storm.
(4) The keys to the facility’s storage area shall be kept under
the control of the Head of Division and accessible to the Magazine
Keeper or the Assistant Keeper.
(5) The storage area shall not be opened to deliver or receive
explosives except by the Magazine Keeper or the Assistant Keeper.
(6) Before the door to the storage area is opened, the door of
the enclosure surrounding it shall be shut and it should be kept
shut until the door to the facility is locked.
6 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 55 Government Powder Magazine
Business
hours



(7) There shall be a distribution house located within the
facility for the receipt and delivery of explosives.
(8) No person who is intoxicated shall be permitted to enter
or remain on a facility and no intoxicating liquor shall be taken
and/or consumed on the facility.
8. Communication—
(a) a wireless set shall be installed in the Guardroom
together with two (2) intrinsically safe battery
operated handie talkies (walkie talkie) for use
within the enclosure of the facility;
(b) a call signal shall be assigned to the guard post of
the facility;
(c) Second Division Officers on duty shall make daily
checks and ensure the communication systems are
operational.
9. Miscellaneous—
(a) the Commissioner of Police acting in accordance with
the powers invested in him by section 5(1) of the
Explosive Act, Chap. 16:02 hereby declares that in
order to effect proper maintenance and safety at a
powder magazine facility each user is required to
pay to the Head of Division the sum of twenty-five
($25.00) dollars monthly;
(b) the Head of Divisions shall on receipt of such sum,
issue a receipt on behalf of the Commissioner and
submit all sums collected to the officer in charge
Finance Branch, except in the case of Tobago
Division;
(c) the officer in charge Finance shall open a register
referred to as the “Powder Magazine Maintenance
Register” wherein all income and expenditure shall
be recorded;
(e) in the case of Tobago, the officer in charge of that
Division shall act in accordance with paragraph (c)
herein.
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 7
Government Powder Magazine S.O. No. 55
Communica-
tion
Miscellaneous



8 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 55 Government Powder Magazine




TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 9
Government Powder Magazine S.O. No. 55




10 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 55 Government Powder Magazine




TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 11
Government Powder Magazine S.O. No. 55
