TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
STANDING  ORDERS  54
POLICE ACTIONS AT PROTESTS/DEMONSTRATIONS



Police Actions at Protests/Demonstrations
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
SECTION
1. Interpretation
2. Responsibilities of Regional Assistant Commissioners of Police
3. Protest/Demonstration Register
4. Maintenance of Register
5. Duty of Senior Second Division Officer
6. Duty of the Area First Division Officer
7. Duty of Police Officers
PART  II
P
ROCEDURES FOR DEALING WITH PROTESTS/DEMONSTRATIONS
8. Duty of First Division Officer at Protest/Demonstrations
2 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 54 Police Actions at Protests/Demonstrations



1. In this order:
“Obstruction” refers to the act of employing the use any
object or person to hinder other persons or motor
vehicles from lawful use of the road;
“Road” means any road, yard or other place to which the
public has access either generally or conditionally;
“Highway” has the same meaning ascribed to it by the
Highways Act, Chap. 48:01, that is to say, “The
whole or part of any road, thoroughfare, street,
trail, trace or way maintainable at the public
expense and dedicated to the public use whether by
way of expression, implied, grant, or by Proclama-
tion of the President or by a  declaration made by a
local authority or by the Minister in accordance
with the provision in that behalf in Part IX, and
includes bridges, culverts, footways, sidewalks and
adjoining reserves accessory to a highway”;
“Street” means and includes any road source, court,
alley, lane, wharf, jetty, quay, bridge, footway,
thoroughfare and any public place and the water of
any harbour in Trinidad and Tobago;
“Public Place” refers to every motorway, road, street,
footpath, access way, alley, lane, court and
thoroughfare;
“Litter” refers to any solid or liquid material or product
or combination of solid or liquid materials or prod-
ucts including but not limited to any bottles, tins,
logs, sawdust, derelict vehicles, cartoons, packages,
packing materials, paper, glass, food, animal
remains, garbage, debris, sand, gravel, stone,
aggregate, dirt, waste (including any human and
animal waste) or any other refuse or rubbish or
waste material or product that is designated as
litter by the Minister by notice published in the
Gazette;
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 3
Police Actions at Protests/Demonstrations S.O. No. 54
Intepretation



“Deposit” means in relation to litter, the act of carting or
placing or allowing to flow or fall, any object or
thing;
“Protest/Demonstration” refers to the act of depositing
on any road, street or highway, any litter with
intent to obstruct the lawful use of that road, street
or highway.
2. The Regional Assistant Commissioners of Police shall—
(a) have executive responsibility for all protests/demon-
strations occurring in their Division;
(b) co-ordinate their Divisions and ensure that executive
policies are disseminated to their Divisional
Commanders;
(c) ensure policies are executed in a uniformed and
harmonised manner;
(d) inform the executive of the protest/demonstration
and the actions taken.
3. (1) The Divisional Commander in every Police Division shall
open a register known as the Protest/Demonstration Register.
(P/DR).
(2) The Divisional Commander shall—
(a) establish systems to deal with any protest/
demonstration;
(b) monitor his division to determine whether any
protest/demonstration may occur;
(c) determine the scope and manner of continued
police presence or intervention in respect of the
protest/demonstration;
(d) deploy Police Officers (in plain clothes if neces-
sary) to ensure the continued surveillance of the
area and to thwart any resurgence of the action;
(e) inform the Regional Assistant Commissioner of
Police of any protest/demonstration; and
(f) hold a post-mortem of the police actions at the
protest/demonstration and make recommenda-
tions.
4 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 54 Police Actions at Protests/Demonstrations
Responsi-
bilities of
Regional
Assistant
Commissioners
of Police
Protest/
Demonstra-
tion Register



4. (1) The Area Assistant Superintendent shall maintain the
protest/demonstration register and shall cause to be recorded
therein all protests/demonstrations which occurred in their area
and the police actions taken including:
(a) the name(s) and address(es) of any person or
persons arrested;
(b) the nature of the offences charged;
(c) the time the action commenced and concluded;
(d) the name of the agency (government and/or private)
which assisted in removing the obstruction, if any;
(e) a record of the post-mortem and the recommenda-
tions suggested.
(2) The Area Assistant Superintendent shall hold lectures on
the systems to be adopted at a protest/demonstration which
include:
(a) the legal provisions relating to obstruction of the
roadway;
(b) the elements which constitute the various offences;
(c) the penalty for breaches or the various statutes.
(3) The Area Assistant Superintendent shall attend and take
overall charge of a protest/demonstration.
(4) Inform the Divisional Commander of a protest/demon-
stration in his area.
5. The Senior Second Division Officer in charge of a station
where a project/demonstration is occurring shall—
(a) inform the First Division Officer in charge of his
area;
(b) detail a strength of Police Officers (himself included)
for immediate despatch to the scene of the action;
(c) on arrival at the scene, ensure prompt remedial
action is taken;
(d) appraise the Area First Division Officer of the situa-
tion and request additional strength (if necessary).
TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE 5
Police Actions at Protests/Demonstrations S.O. No. 54
Maintenance
of Register
Duty of
Senior Second
Division
Officer



6. The Area First Division Officer who is appraised of a protest/
demonstration shall—
(a) proceed immediately to the scene;
(b) request from the Divisional Commander additional
strength an support from a government agency;
(c) inform the First Division Officer in charge of Guard
and Emergency Branch.
7. At the scene of a protest/demonstration, police officers shall—
(a) be tactful and avoid confrontation with the pro-
testers/demonstrators;
(b) remove or cause to be removed any object or person
that obstructs the free flow of motor or pedestrian
traffic;
(c) ensure law and order is maintained;
(d) arrest any person who commits an offence or
offences. 
PART  II
P
ROCEDURES FOR DEALING WITH PROTESTS/DEMONSTRATIONS
8. Where a protest/demonstration is in progress with respect to
an industrial trade dispute, the First Division Officer shall—
(a) (i) detail a party of officers to preserve the peace;
(ii) ensure that company employees and other
persons who are not participating in the related
action enjoy unobstructed access on the road;
(b) cordon off the area of the protest/demonstration;
(c) ascertain whether (if the participants have decided
to march) permission was previously granted for a
march; and
(d) if no permission was granted, inform the leader of he
march and proceed to stop the procession.
6 TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO  POLICE  SERVICE
S.O. No. 54 Police Actions at Protests/Demonstrations
Duty of the
Area First
Division
Officer
Duty of Police
Officers
Duty of First
Division
Officer at
Protest/
Demonstra-
tions