af Police Orders by
CA Commissioner of Police

1" Police Administration Building

tiene Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets

— Port of Spain

7, oo
OTH Pao Monday 15‘ March, 2021.
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian employees of
the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
eee ee eee
No. 27 Departmental Order PART I-NIL PART II
CASH SEIZURES IN RELATION TO THE PROCEEDS OF CRIME ACT

INTRODUCTION AND RATIONALE
This Departmental Order has been developed to establish protocols in relation to the
seizure and detention of cash (under Proceeds of Crime Act Chapter 11:27) including
court requirements, by members of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service (TTPS).
The organization hopes to achieve organizational excellence by implementing the
necessary policies and procedures that would contribute towards and improved
perception of the TTPS, which will ultimately lead to the restoration of public trust
and confidence. By the same token, the professional development of members of the
TTPS, through improved member training and education, can transform the Service
into a more efficient and effective organization.
INTENTION
The overall purpose of this Departmental Order is to ensure that police officers:

e are well informed of their powers, roles and functions when seizing cash and
cash detentions under the Proceeds of Crime Act (POCA) Chapter 11:27;

e are highly competent in the execution of their duties in impending cash
forfeiture applications;

e are fully proficient in the manner of maintaining the chain of custody in cash
seizures and protecting and preserving evidence;

e understand their roles, functions and responsibilities during the court process
of securing cash detention orders as well as at the stage of the cash forfeiture
application and/or financial crime prosecution.

AUTHORITY
The Proceeds of Crime Act Chapter 11:27 establishes the procedure for the
confiscation of the proceeds of certain offences and for the criminalizing of money
laundering. Section 38 (1) of the Act clearly delineates the following hierarchical rank
of officers allowed to seize or detain cash under the Act:
ar 4
’


--- page break ---

ea a
a) A Custom and Excise officer of the rank of Grade III or higher may seize or
detain any cash in accordance with the section.
b) A Police officer of the Rank of Sergeant or higher (inclusive of acting
Sergeant) may seize or detain any cash in accordance with the section.
1. CIRCUMSTANCES/ CONDITIONS
1.1. The following are the circumstances/ conditions for the seizure and detention
of cash as outlined in the Act:

a) When the officer has reason to believe that the cash directly or indirectly
represents any person’s proceeds of a specified offence, or is intended by
any person for use in the commission of such an offence- Sec 38 (1)(A) of the
POCA.

Note: A specified offence is any offence which is punishable upon conviction
with a fine of more than five thousand dollars or to imprisonment for not less
than twelve (12) months. Specified Offences are listed in the Second Schedule
of the POCA.

b) The cash being seized must be in excess of twenty thousand dollars
Trinidad and Tobago currency (TT$20,000.00).

Note: According to the Legal Notice No. 38 dated March 11' 2011, the
prescribed sum for seizure, is any sum more than twenty thousand dollars
Trinidad and Tobago currency (TT$20,000.00), or such sum of foreign
currencies, when converted at the prevailing exchange rate, is in excess of
TT$20,000.00.
Cash includes notes, coins and negotiable instruments in any currency.
Although cash seizures are guided by the prescribed sum, it should be noted
that this sum does not have to be in the possession of a single person. If cash
less than the prescribed sum is found on persons together, and such cash can
be shown that the money comes from a common source or has a common
destination (specified offence) and aggregately is in excess of the prescribed
sum, such cash can also be seized.
2. SEIZURES

2.1. Where possible, in cases where cash is found in inconspicuous and/or
suspicious locations, such cash should be photographed in its finding state.

2.2. If the cash found is not in a foreign currency, the finding officer shall cause
enquiries to be conducted into the going exchange rate of the foreign currency
to determine its local currency value.

cvnfet


--- page break ---

27/3

2.3. When the officer has reasonable grounds to conduct a cash seizure:

(a) The officer must inform the subject that he has reason to believe that the
cash found directly or indirectly represents the proceeds of a specified
offence, or is intended to be used in the commission of such an offence.

(b) If the subject makes any utterances at the scene, the officer must
contemporaneously record same in his pocket diary or notebook, read it
over to the subject or have the subject read it over and sign same.

(c) The senior officer present must also sign or initial the entry.

2.4. NOTE: Notwithstanding the above where there are reasonable grounds to
suspect that the cash is the proceeds of unlawful conduct, or intended for such
use, consideration should be given to whether there are reasonable grounds
to arrest the person holding the cash, for criminal offences, i.e., Theft or
Money-laundering.

2.4.1. This option should be exercised and based solely on the circumstances
surrounding the seizure and other information at hand, for example,
where there is a report of robbery at a bank/ business or elsewhere and
the cash and suspects are detained in circumstances relating to that
offence. .

2.4.2. If a person in charge of the cash is arrested in connection with it, the cash
should be seized. The detained person and the cash should then be
conveyed to the nearest station in accordance with current arrest
procedures. They should be processed in the normal manner, and the cash
dealt with as an exhibit for the particular offence and lodged with the
property keeper in accordance with Standing Order 26.

2.4.3. If the circumstances are not this clear cut, and the option of arrest is
considered, there must be consultation between the seizing officers and
their senior officers of the Division/Branch/Unit who detected the cash
and/or the Financial Investigations Branch (FIB), and a_ proper
justification for the arrest must be made in the station diary.

2.4.4. In cases where cash ought to be returned, input from the FIB, Senior
Superintendent of the Division or section, the investigator, an Executive
Officer ,Assistant Commissioner of Police or above and a final decision
given by the Deputy Commissioner Intelligence and Investigation should
be given justifying the return of the seizure.

/4
ae a


--- page break ---

27/4
3. CASH DETENTION GUIDELINES

3.1 In cases where the cash was not discovered by the FIB, every effort should be
made to inform the FIB of the circumstances surrounding the cash seizure as
early as possible. Section 38 (2) of the POCA states that cash seized by virtue of
this Section shall not be detained by the Police or Customs for more than
ninety-six (96) hours unless its continued detention is authorized by an Order
made by a Magistrate.

3.2 In cases where the FIB is a part of the exercise, the seizing officer will be assisted
by the FIB officer with the counting of the cash in the presence of the subject.

3.3 The subject must be issued with a receipt for the seized cash which must
include the denominations of the cash. The seizing officer, the FIB investigator
as well as the subject must sign the receipt. In cases where the subject refuses
to sign the receipt,a note of such refusal must be made in the Station Diary.

3.4 In cases where the FIB is not present, on the FIB’s arrival the cash will be
recounted in the presence of the FIB, and handed over to the FIB by the seizing
officer. Such handover is to be noted in the Station Diary with both officers

3.5 The seized cash must be placed in an evidence bag and sealed in the presence
of the subject. This evidence bag must be signed by the seizing officer, FIB
officer as well as the subject. The amount of cash should also be noted on the
evidence bag along with the denominations.

3.6 It is the responsibility of the finding and seizing officers to provide the FIB
investigator with a statement surrounding the find and seizure of the cash no
later than 36 hours after the seizure. This statement should also include the
retrieval of photographs taken by the finding officer or steps taken to have the
cash photographed.

3.7 In cases where a decision has been made to make an application for the
continued detention of the seized cash, it is the responsibility of the FIB
investigator to assist the seizing officer with the preparation of the Cash
Detention Application. This application for Cash Detention must reach the
FIB’s Legal Officer not later than 48 hours before the expiration of the 96 hours.
The application must be laid before the Court at least 24 hours before the 96-
hour expiration. The Application must be signed by the seizing officer.

3.8 On the first court appearance the finding and seizing officer must attend court
for the purpose of giving evidence in relation to the circumstances surrounding
the seizure (including the suspicion).

info


--- page break ---

27/5
3.9 For Further Detention Applications (generally every three (3) months) the
seizing officer will be contacted by the FIB investigator who will update
him/her on the progress of the financial investigation. The FIB investigator will
prepare an application based on the progress of the investigation and the
seizing officer will be required to sign such application. The seizing officer may
also be required to attend court (being the applicant).
Note: A Cash Detention Order shall authorize the continued detention of the
cash for a period not exceeding three months beginning with the date of the
Order and the total period of detention shall not exceed two (2) years from
the date of the first Order.
3.10 In cases where the cash is being held as an exhibit, the record of the serial
numbers should be stored in the following manner:

3.10.1 If the Electronic Money-Counter is used, the officer shall immediately
cause such record to be saved electronically in both Excel and PDF
format which should form part of his/her evidence, and a copy of such
electronic copy in PDF format (CD/DVD/ USB) should be handed over
to the Property Keeper in the respective Station as well as in the
possession of the investigator.

3.10.2 If the digital camera is used, the officer shall immediately retrieve the
photographs taken from the camera, transferring same to a station
desktop computer and saving same to a CD/DVD/USB. The
investigator should provide an electronic copy of these photographs to
the Property Keeper in the respective station as well as keep a copy in
his/her possession.

3.10.3 If typed-written, the officer shall save the document in both Excel and
PDF format to a CD/DVD/USB. The investigator should provide a
copy of the PDF format to the Property Keeper at the respective Station
and retain both the Excel and PDF format.

3.10.4 If recorded manually (hand-written), the officer shall scan each page
of the records and save same to a CD/DVD/USB in either PDF or
Acrobat Reader formats. A copy of the electronic version is to be
provided to the Property Keeper at the respective Station and the
investigator should retain a copy.

3.10.5 All versions of records must always be in the possession of the
investigator. The electronic versions (that cannot be manipulated, e.g.,
PDF, etc.) of the serial numbers recorded by all investigators should be
kept in safe-keeping by the respective Property Keeper for retrieval, if
needed, for evidential purposes.

../6


--- page break ---

27/6

3.10.6 In cases where a Detention Order has been granted for the seized cash,
it is the responsibility of the FIB investigator to ensure the cash,
immediately upon the completion of the recording of serial numbers
process, is deposited at the Central Bank. In the event that there is any
lapse in time of recording the serial numbers and the time taken to be
deposited at the Central Bank, the cash must be handed over to the
FIB’s Property Keeper for safe-keeping, and the necessary notes must
be made in both officers’ pocket and desk diaries. Additionally, a
signed entry in the Station Diary must be made.

PART I-NIL
Commissioner of Police
