 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Police Administration Building, 6th Floor, Corner Edward & Sackville Streets,  
P.O. Box 387, Port of Spain, Trinidad, Republic of Trinidad & Tobago. 
 Telephone:  1 (868) 624-8429       Facsimile:  1 (868) 623-2589 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Criminal Procedure Rules, 2016 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Training Guide 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROCEDURE UNDER THE CRIMINAL RULES, 2016 
 
FILE PREPARATION AT THE DOCUMENT CENTRE 
    Steps: 
1. The Investigator takes the Original Written Statement with the 
File; 
2. The File is vetted by the Legal Officer/Review Officer for content 
and form; 
3. Where the Statements are in order they are then typed; 
4. The Statements along with the other relevant documents are 
then compiled to form a proper file (case docket/summary file); 
5. The completed file is then approved by the supervisor and forwarded 
to the relevant court prosecutor for the necessary action. 
6. Where the file is incomplete or unsatisfactory in its content and form 
it will be sent back to the Investigator to be corrected and re-sent. 
 
 
             
 
 
Note: The whole process is driven by the supervisor of the document  
Centre.  



 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
FILE PREPARATION AT THE DOCUMENT CENTRE 
DIAGRAM 1 
 
 
 
              
 
 
 
 
                                                                                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Send original written 
statements to type 
along with File to 
Centre 
Investigator/ 
Complainant 
Legal Officer/Review 
Officer reviews File 
for content and form 
Where the Statements 
are in order they are 
then typed. 
The Statements along with 
the other relevant 
documents are then 
compiled to form a proper 
file (case docket/ 
Summary File. 
The Completed File is then 
approved by the supervisor and 
forwarded to the relevant 
Court Prosecutor for the 
necessary action. 
Where the File is incomplete 
or unsatisfactory in its 
content and form it will be 
sent back to the Investigator 
to be corrected and re-sent. 



 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROCEDURE UNDER THE CRIMINAL RULES, 2016 
 
Flow Chart  
From arrest to trial in the High Court 
    
 Steps: 
1. An Arrest is made; 
 
2. A person is charge and the Complainant/Information is laid in the 
Court office of the Magistrates’ Court; 
 
3. On the day of first hearing the accused/defendant is brought to Court 
to answer the charge. The prosecution is required to disclose to the 
Court Officer and the accused/defendant or his Attorney at Law no 
later than the commencement of the first hearing the following : 
a. A Summary of the evidence on which the case is based; 
b. Any document or extract setting out facts or other matters the 
case is based or any combination of summary of evidence, 
statement, document, extract or criminal record, if any; 
 
4. At the commencement of the proceedings both the prosecution and 
the defence must, unless the Court otherwise directs: 
a. Specify and inform the Court who is the person responsible for 
progressing the case and how to contact him/her; and 
b. Inform the other side in the case who is the person responsible 
for progressing the case and how to contact him/her. 
 
 
 



 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. In a summary matter where the defendant, or an either- way/hybrid 
matter where the accused elects  for a summary trial and he/she, 
pleads guilty the summary of the evidence is read as facts of the 
case. Where the defendant/accused accepts the facts the 
Magistrate will sentence him/her accordingly; 
 
6. Where, however, the defendant/accused pleads not guilt y or the 
matter is a strictly indictable one the Court may give direction in 
relation to the management of the matter which may be- 
a. Give a direction on its own initiative or on application by a 
party; 
b. Ask or allow a party to propose a direction; 
c. For the purpose of giving directions, receive applications and 
representations by letter, by telephone or by any other means 
of electronic communication, and conduct a hearing by such 
means; 
d. Fix, postpone, bring forward, extend, cancel or adjourn a 
hearing; 
e. Give directions without a hearing; 
f. Shorten or extend (even after it has expired) a time limit fixed 
by a direction; 
g. Require that issues in the case should be- 
i. Identified in writing; or 
ii. Determined separately, and decide in what order they 
will be determined; 
h. Require parties to file in Court written submissions, including 
a no case submission by the defence and reply by the 
prosecution and serve such submissions and reply on a date 
or within a period directed by the Court; or 
i. Specify the consequences of failing to comply with a direction. 
 
  



 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7. The Court has the power to and can direct that the prosecution 
on any subsequent hearing to disclose to the defendant/accused 
all the evidence they intend to rely upon at trial at a particular 
date. In addition, the Court can direct the prosecution to 
disclose any material in its possession that they do not intend 
to use at trial which materially weakens its case or assists the 
defendant/accused or even fix a date to confirm whether or not 
they have such material in its possession. The Court may 
direct; 
8. Where the Court refuses to allow disclosure, it can upon an 
application made by the defendant/accused and his/her 
Attorney at Law permit that the unused material be inspected 
by them.; 
9. In terms of conducting the trial in an efficient manner the 
Court will have to: 
a. Establish the disputed issues with the active assistance of 
the parties; 
b. Consider setting a timetable that takes account of the 
disputed issues and any timetable proposed by a party; 
c. use its discretion to determine whether it requires a party 
to identify either orally or in writing- 
i. which witnesses that party wants to give evidence in 
person; 
ii. the order in which its witnesses are to give evidence; 
iii. whether that party requires an order compelling the 
attendance of a witness; 
iv. what arrangement or special measures are desirable 
to facilitate the giving of evidence by a witness; 
v. what arrangement are desirable to facilitate the 
participation of any other person, including the 
accused; 



 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
vi. What written or other evidence that party intends to    
introduce;  
vii. What facts and evidence can be agreed between the 
parties; 
viii. What other material, if any, that person intends to make 
available to the Court in the presentation of the case; 
ix. Whether that party intends to raise any point of law that 
could affect the conduct of the trial; 
x. Set a timetable for the service of written submissions 
and lists of authorities that the party intends to rely on; 
and 
xi. The relevant disclosure a party requests to be made; 
d. May limit- 
i. The examination, cross-examination or re-examination of 
a witness; and 
ii. The duration of any stage of the hearing Court; 
e. May make a direction that the case be heard in another Court. 
 
 
 



 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
COURT PROCEDURE IN THE MAGISTRATES’ COURT 
 
Diagram 2 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Arrest and Charge 
 First Hearing before 
the Magistrate 
Subsequent Hearing 
before the Magistrate 
Initial Disclosure 
To Court Officer 
and 
Accused/Defendant 
or 
his/her Attorney at Law 
at the Commencement of 
the hearing 
May give direction to fixed 
date for disclosure in 
relation to: 
-evidence the prosecution 
intend to use, and 
-material the prosecution 
does not intend to use; 
- whether the prosecution is 
in possession of material 
they do not intend to use 
Initial Disclosable documents: 
1. Summary of Evidence; 
2. Extract or 
3. Statement, 
4. Document, 
5. Criminal Records 
Court will set date for trial 
and give direction for the 
efficient management of the 
case 
At the commencement of 
hearing the prosecutor 
must inform the Court and 
the defence who is the 
person responsible for 
progressing the case and 
how to contact that person.  
TRIAL 
 
(Direction may be given in the 
trial) 
Case Progression Officer 
a. Monitor compliance 
with directions; 
b. Ensure that the court is 
kept informed of events 
that my affect the 
progress of that case; 
c. Ensure that he can be 
contacted promptly 
about the case during 
ordinary business hours; 
d. Act promptly and 
reasonably in response 
to communications 
about the case; and 
e. If he will be available, 
appoint a substitute to 
fulfil his duties and 
inform the CPOs. 



 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
On the inne 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
     PREPARATION OF CRIME DOCKET/RTA CASE FILE 
 
Crime Docket 
 
In the preparation of a Crime Docket for an indictable matter for 
trial and for disclosure the following is necessary to constitute such a 
Docket, in accordance with DO no. 28, para. 19 of the Police 
Standing Order: 
 
a. The outer front cover should be written in accordance with the 
specifications listed thereon. 
b. On the inner front cover a copy of the charge(s) shall be 
written. 
c. On the inner rear cover a certified extract of the Criminal 
Record of the accused if any, shall be affixed. 
d. From front to rear, the file shall contain- 
i. An Index to file; 
ii. Forwarding Remarks; 
iii. Summary of Evidence; 
iv. Statement of Virtual Complainant (Victim); 
v. Other Supporting Statements; 
vi. Complainant Statement; 
vii. Copies of Documentary Exhibit(s); 
viii. A copy of the Accused Statement, if any (not the original); 
ix. Negative Statements, if any; 
x. Triplicate copy of charge; 
xi. Copy of Notice to Prisoner. 
 
Note: In the preparation of Summary Case File, it is not necessary to 
attached an Index to file but all the other documents will be 
necessary. 



 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PREPARATION OF CRIME DOCKET/RTA CASE FILE (con’t) 
 
Charge Case 
 
In the preparation of a Summary Case Jacket/Crime Docket for a 
charge case for the first hearing the following should be done: 
a. The points at a., b., and c., above should be done; 
b. In addition, the file should contain from front to rear the 
following: 
i. A summary of evidence; 
ii. Virtual Complainant Statement, if any; 
iii. Complainant Statement; 
iv. Other supporting Statement; 
v. Medical certificate (copy), if any; 
vi. Accused cautionary Statement, if any; 
vii. Copy of Notice to the Prisoner. 
 
Note: The documents in the file will be disclosable to the Court 
Officer and the accused/defendant and his Attorney at Law. 



 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREPARATION OF CRIME DOCKET/RTA CASE FILE (con’t) 
 
RTA Case File 
 
The   File in a Road Traffic Accident especially in a Causing Death 
by Dangerous Driving, should be prepared as follows: 
 
a. The outer front cover should be written in accordance with the 
specifications listed thereon. 
b. On the inner front cover a copy of the charge(s) shall be 
written. 
c. On the inner rear cover a certified extract of the Criminal 
Record of the accused if any, shall be affixed. 
d. From front to rear, the file shall contain- 
i. An Index to file; 
ii. Forwarding Remarks; 
iii. Summary of Evidence; 
iv. Statement of Virtual Complainant (Victim); 
v. Other Supporting Statements; 
vi. Complainant Statement; 
vii. Copies of Documentary Exhibit(s); 
viii. A copy of the Accused Statement, if any (not the 
original); 
ix. Negative Statements, if any; 
x. Triplicate copy of charge; 
xi. Copy of Notice to Prisoner. 
  



 
 
 
 
12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROCEDURE TO BE FOLLOWED BY POLICE OFFICERS RE: 
SWEARING OF STATEMENT AND THE TREATMENT OF 
EXHIBITS 
 
Swearing 
 
1. Take witness before a Justice of the Peace (need not be at 
Magistrates’ Court) and have the statement read to the witness 
out loud in your presence (either by yourself or the JP); 
 
2. Witness must have a form of identification i.e. Identification 
Card, etc; 
 
3. Must have original exhibits (documentary or physical) at the 
swearing so that the witness can confirm his/her ability to 
identify same; 
 
4. If the witness agrees that the contents of the statement are true, 
leave the room and allow the witness to swear/affirm before the 
JP in private; 
 
5. If the witness does not agree that the contents are true in whole 
or in part, make a note of which parts are true/untrue and 
consult with state attorney (do not mark on original 
statement); 
 
6. If the witness wishes to affirm instead of swear, the JP must 
strike out the word “swear” in his certificate and write in the 
word “affirm” in its place; 



 
 
 
 
13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
………………………………………….. 
LEGAL OFFICER,  
LEGAL UNIT 
 
 
PROCEDURE TO BE FOLLOWED BY POLICE OFFICERS RE: 
SWEARING OF STATEMENT AND THE TREATMENT OF 
EXHIBITS (con’t) 
 
Exhibits 
 
1. For documentary exhibits, a cover page should be stapled to 
the front of the exhibit. This page should be signed and 
dated by the witness and JP; 
2. Do not allow any markings to be placed on the original 
documentary exhibits; 
3. On physical exhibits, a piece of masking tape should be 
place on the exhibit with following information only, (for 
example): 
 “AB1””(Signature of witness)” 



 
 
 
 
14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
 
 
 
16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
 
 
 
17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
 
 
 
18 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 