THE  POLICE  SERVICE  ACT, 2006
Arrangement of Sections
PART I
PRELIMINARY
Section
1. Short title
2. Commencement
3. Interpretation
PART II
ESTABLISHMENT AND STRUCTURE OF THE POLICE SERVICE
4. Establishment of the Police Service
5. President authorized to issue arms to the Police Service
6. Classification of offices
7. Divisions of the Police Service 
8. Remuneration Order
9. Increment
PART III
A
PPOINTMENT OF TRAINEE
10. Application to be trainee 
11. Qualification for trainee 
12. Appointment and control of trainee 
13. Dismissal of trainee 
14. Regulations for trainee
15. Successful trainee
PART IV
APPOINTMENT AND PROMOTION OF POLICE OFFICERS
16. Appointment and promotion to First and Second Division
17. Assessment Centre and Promotion Advisory Board
18. Functions of the Centre and Board
19. Procedure of Centre and Board
20. Criteria for promotion
21. Appointment or promotion on probation
22. Contract officers 
 



PART V
DISCIPLINE
23. Disciplinary powers
PART VI
DUTIES OF THE PERSONNEL DEPARTMENT IN RELATION TO THE
POLICE SERVICE
24. Powers and duties
25. Consultation with appropriate recognized association
26. Where no agreement reached after consultation
27. Submission of proposals to appropriate recognized
association for approval
28. Agreement to be recorded and signed
29. Personnel Department subject to Minister of Finance under
this Part
30. Dispute to be referred to Special Tribunal
31. Special Tribunal power of award
32. Award to be binding on parties for fixed period 
PART VII
POLICE SERVICE ASSOCIATIONS
33. Prohibition against membership of trade union
34. Representation of police officers
35. Regulations governing recognition
36. Appropriate recognized association to make rules
37. Complaints by members of appropriate recognized
association
38. Recognized police associations
PART VIII
G
ENERAL FUNCTIONS AND OBLIGATIONS OF MEMBERS OF THE
POLICE SERVICE
39. Police officer voting
40. Police officer and political activities
41. Public statements by police officer on certain matters
42. Certain police officers to be Justices
43. Every police officer to be a constable
44. General power of police officer
45. General duties of police officer
46. Power to arrest without a warrant
ii



47. Power to arrest without having warrant in possession
48. Execution of warrant or order
49. Action against police officer for acting on warrant or order
50. Power to take measurement, photograph and fingerprint
51. Certificate of character
52. Analysis of fingerprint impression 
53. Punishment for serious offence
54. Public property not to be used privately
55. Delivery up of article supplied on leaving the Police Service
56. Improper possession of article supplied to police officer
57. Delivery up of article supplied to deceased police officer
58. Unclaimed article
59. Assault, etc., on police officer
60. Refusing to assist police officer assaulted
61. Harbouring police officer
62. Impersonation of police officer or wearing police uniform, etc.
63. Obtaining admission into the Police Service by fraud
64. Right to prosecute police cases
65. Award Fund
66. Awards Board
67. Granting of special award 
68. Fines and bribes to be payable to the Fund
69. Account to be kept 
PART IX
M
ISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
70. Sale of liquor in Canteens and Messes
71. Police Station to be lock-up
72. Police officer to take oath of office
73. Mode of leaving service
74. Age of retirement for police officer
75. Extension of service
76. Grant of three months salary to next of kin of deceased police
officer
77. Payment of arrears of salary or pension without production of
probate or letters of administration
78. Regulations 
79. Savings
80. Repeal
FIRST SCHEDULE
SECOND SCHEDULE
THIRD SCHEDULE
FOURTH SCHEDULE
FIFTH SCHEDULE
iii



AN ACT to consolidate , amend and revise the law
relating to the P olice Service , to ensure efficient
and transparent management of the Service and
to provide that the principles of equity and
meritocracy shall be applied at all times and for
other related matters.
[Assented to 13th April, 2006]
Fourth  Session  Eighth  Parliament  Republic  of 
Trinidad and Tobago           
REPUBLIC  OF  TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO
Act No. 7 of 2006
[L.S.]
Legal Supplement Part A to the Trinidad and Tobago Gazette’’, Vol. 45,
No. 61, 18th April, 2006



ENACTED by the Parliament of Trinidad and Tobago as
follows:—
PART  I  
PRELIMINARY
1. This Act may be cited as the Police Service Act,
2006.
2. This Act shall come into operation on such date as
the President may appoint by Proclamation.
3. In this Act—
“allowance” means compensation payable—
(a) in respect of a grade or in respect
of some office in a grade, by reason
of duties of a special nature;
(b) for duties that a police officer is
required to perform in addition to
the duties of his grade where those
duties relate to an office in the
same grade or a higher grade; or
(c) for contingencies associated with
the performance of his functions as
a police officer and not taken into
consideration in fixing his pay;
“appropriate recognized association” means an
association recognized by the Minister of
Finance under section 34 as the bargaining
body for any rank of police officers;
“Board” means the Promotion Advisory Board
established under section 17(2);
“classification” means the assignment of an
office to a grade;
Short title
Commencement
Interpretation
Enactment
376 No. 7 Police Service 2006



“cohabitant” means—
(a) in relation to a man, a woman who
has been living with or has lived
together with him in a bona fide
domestic relationship for a period
of not less than five years
immediately preceding the date of
his death; or
(b) in relation to a woman, a man
who has been living with or has
lived together with her in a 
bona
fide domestic relationship for a
period of not less than five years
immediately preceding the date of
her death,
but only one suc h relationship shall be
taken into account for the purpose of this
Act;
“Commission” means the Police Service
Commission established under section
122(1) of the Constitution;
“Commissioner” or “Deputy Commissioner”
means the person appointed to the office of
the Commissioner of Police or Deputy
Commissioner of Police respectively, in
accordance with section 123(1)
(a) of the
Constitution;
“dispute” means any matter in respect of police
officers upon which agreement has not
been reached between the Personnel
Department and the appropriate police
association and which has been reported to
the Minister under section 26 or 27;
“former Act” means the P olice Service Act
repealed by this Act;
Chap. 15:01
No.7 Police Service 2006 377



“grade” includes a range given in the classifica-
tion of offices set out in the Third Schedule;
“intoxicating liquor” means spirits, wine or
beer, or any liquor being a mixture,
beverage or preparation containing the
same;
“judicial officer” means a Judge, Magistrate or
Justice;
“Minister” means the Minister to whom the
responsibility for national security is
assigned;
“office” means an office in the Police Service
assigned to a grade;
“pay” means the rate of pay assigned to an
office in a grade by a Remuneration Order,
but does not include the allowances;
“pensionable emoluments” in respect of the
Police Service , means pa y and personal
allowance;
“Personnel Department” means the Personnel
Department established under the
Civil Service Act;
“police officer” means a person who is
appointed to perform the duties of an office
in the Police Service;
“Police Service” means the Trinidad and Tobago
Police Service established by section 4;
“prescribed” means as prescribed in the
regulations;
“regulations” means the regulations made
under this Act;
Chap. 23:01
378 No. 7 Police Service 2006



“remuneration” means pay and allowances;
“Special Tribunal” means the Special Tribunal
established by section 21(1) of the Civil
Service Act;
“spouse” includes a cohabitant;
“trainee” means a person who is undergoing
initial training with a view to becoming a
police officer.
PART II
E
STABLISHMENT AND STRUCTURE OF THE POLICE SERVICE
4. (1) The Trinidad and Tobago Police Service is
hereby established constituting the public offices as set
out in the Third Schedule.
(2) Every person who immediately before the
commencement of this Act held or was acting in an office
in the P olice Service constituted under the former Act
shall, as from the commencement of this Act, continue
to hold or act in the like office in the P olice Service
constituted under subsection (1), by whatever title
called.
(3) A reference to the Police Service or to
any member thereof in any written law in force
immediately before the commencement of this Act shall,
as from the commencement of this Act, be read
and construed as a reference to the P olice Service
constituted by this Act or to a member thereof.
5. The President may issue arms and ammunition to
the Police Service, and any member thereof may carry
and use the same for lawful purposes.
6. (1) The President may, by Order, amend the
classification of offices set out in the Third Schedule.
Establishment of the
Police Service
Third Schedule
President authorized
to issue arms to the
Police Service
Classification of offices 
Third Schedule
No.7 Police Service 2006 379



(2) The classification of offices set out in the Third
Schedule shall be the basis for any classification Order
made under this section.
(3) The classification of offices set out in the Third
Schedule shall be observed in all records and communi-
cations of the Commission, Commissioner, Auditor
General, Treasury and in all departmental estimates
and parliamentary returns and appropriations.
7. (1) The Police Service shall consist of two
Divisions, that is to say—
(a) the First Division; and
(b) the Second Division.
(2) The First Division shall be the offices specified
in the First Schedule and include such other offices as
the President may, by Order, determine.
(3) The Second Division shall be the offices
specified in the Second Schedule and include such other
offices as the President may, by Order, determine.
8. (1) The President may, by Order—
(a) determine the pay in respect of an office in
a grade;
(b) establish the allowances that may be paid
in addition to pay;
(c) give effect to any agreement entered into
between the Chief Personnel Officer on
behalf of the Minister of Finance and the
appropriate recognized association; and
(d) give effect to an award made by the Special
Tribunal.
(2) An Order made in respect of matters specified
in subsection (1) (a) and (b) shall be referred to as a
Remuneration Order.
Divisions of the
Police Service
Second Schedule
First Schedule
Remuneration Order
380 No. 7 Police Service 2006



9. Except where the contrary is provided in a
Remuneration Order, increases of pay that may be
granted in respect of an office in a grade in accordance
with the Remuneration Order shall be annual, but no
increase of pay shall be made in respect of an office in a
grade in which the police officer performing the duties of
the office has not completed a period of twelve months
continuous duty in that office.
PART  III
A
PPOINTMENT OF TRAINEES
10. A person seeking to be a trainee ma y apply to the
Commissioner in the form and manner prescribed.
11. A person making an application under section 10
shall satisfy the requirements prescribed.
12. (1) The Commissioner may appoint as a trainee a
person applying under section 10, who satisfies the
requirements prescribed.
(2) Subject to the regulations, a trainee shall be
under the control of the Commissioner.
(3) Without prejudice to subsection (2), for the
purpose of any law relating to the functions or vicarious
liability of an employer, the Commissioner shall be
treated as the employer of any trainee undergoing
training with the Police Service.
(4) A trainee is not a worker as defined in the
Industrial Relations Act.
13. Where a trainee fails to complete successfully a
course of training approved by the Commissioner or
for any reason is otherwise considered unfit to be a
member of the Police Service, the Commissioner may
summarily terminate his status as a trainee.
Application to be
trainee
Qualification for
trainee
Appointment and
control of trainee
Dismissal of trainee
Chap. 88:01
Increment
No.7 Police Service 2006 381



14. The Commissioner may make regulations as to
the management and conditions of service of a trainee.
15. A trainee who successfully completes the
approved course of training is eligible to be appointed as
a constable on probation for the period prescribed.
PART IV
APPOINTMENT AND PROMOTION OF POLICE OFFICERS
16. (1) In the exercise of the powers vested in him
by section 123 A(2)(a) of the Constitution, the
Commissioner shall take into account—
(a) in the case of promotion to and within the
First Division, the results of the
Assessment Centre; or
(b) in the case of promotion in the Second
Division, the recommendations of the
Promotion Advisory Board,
when he makes an appointment on promotion.
17. (1) There is established an Assessment Centre,
the members of which shall be prescribed.
(2) There is established a Promotion Advisory
Board which shall comprise five members as follows:
(a) the Deputy Commissioner of Police with
responsibility for Administration;
(b) an Assistant Commissioner of Police;
(c) the Human Resources Director of the Police
Service;
(d) a senior officer, who is not a police officer,
from the Ministry of National Security,
selected by the Minister; and
(e) an independent management consultant,
appointed by the Commissioner.
Appointment on
promotion to First
and Second Division
Assessment Centre
and Promotion
Advisory Board
Regulations for
trainee
Successful trainee
382 No. 7 Police Service 2006



(3) The Commissioner shall engage a person who
is not a police officer as Secretary to the Board.
(4) The appropriate recognized association may
nominate a representative to be present as an observer
at sittings of the Board.
(5) The Board shall sit as often as it thinks
necessary, but at least twice per year, to consider
promotions and notice of each sitting shall be given in a
timely manner to the representative referred to in
subsection (4).
18. (1) The Assessment Centre shall conduct an
assessment of the suitability for promotion of a police
officer in the First Division from the rank of
Assistant Superintendent through and to
Assistant Commissioner and shall submit its results to
the Commissioner in relation to his functions under
section 123
A(2)(a) of the Constitution.
(2) The Board shall make recommendations to the
Commissioner in relation to his functions under section
123A(2)(a) of the Constitution.
(3) The Commissioner may discuss with the
Assessment Centre any results submitted under
subsection (1) or with the Board any recommendation
made under subsection (2).
19. (1) For the purpose of assessing the suitability for
promotion to the rank of Assistant Superintendent
through to Assistant Commissioner , the Assessment
Centre shall take into account the procedure prescribed.
(2) At the conclusion of each sitting of the Board,
the Chairman shall submit to the Commissioner the
Board’s recommendations in the form of an Order of
Merit List.
Procedure of Centre
and Board
Functions of the
Centre and Board
No. 7 Police Service 2006 383



(3) The Secretary to the Board shall keep a record
of the ratings given to every police officer who appears
before the Board.
(4) A police officer is entitled to apply to the Board
to be informed in writing of his ratings.
20. (1) To be eligible for promotion to the rank of—
(a) Assistant Superintendent through and
to Assistant Commissioner, a police officer
shall be assessed by the Assessment Centre
taking into account the criteria prescribed;
(b) Constable through to Inspector a police
officer is required to pass a qualifying
examination.
(2) In considering the suitability for promotion of
a police officer of the rank of Constable through to
Inspector, the Board shall conduct an interview and take
into account the criteria prescribed.
(3) In considering the suitability for promotion of
a police officer of the rank of Constable through to
Inspector, the Commissioner shall take into account the
criteria prescribed.
21. (1) A police officer on first appointment shall
serve the prescribed period of probation.
(2) If at any time before the end of the
probationary period of a constable, the Commissioner
has  reasonable grounds to believe that the interest of
the Police Service will not be served by retaining the
constable, the Commissioner may summarily dismiss
him.
(3) A constable who successfully completes his
period of probation and who satisfies all other
prescribed requirements is eligible to be confirmed as a
constable.
Appointment or
promotion on
probation
Criteria for
promotion
384 No. 7 Police Service 2006



(4) A police officer who is promoted shall serve the
prescribed period of probation.
22. (1) The Commission may, having regard to the
qualifications, experience, skills and merit of a person
who is not in the Service, appoint on contract such a
person as a police officer to the rank of Commissioner or
Deputy Commissioner for any specified period.
(2) The Commissioner may, having regard to the
qualifications, experience, skills and merit of a person
who is not in the Service, appoint on contract such a
person as a police officer for any specified period.
(3) The Commissioner may appoint on contract
for any specified period and purpose a person who is not
a police officer.
PART  V
D
ISCIPLINE
23. (1) In the exercise of the powers vested in him by
section 123A(2)(c) of the Constitution, the Commissioner
shall comply with the procedures set out in the
regulations.
(2) An appeal shall lie to the Commission from
any decision of the Commissioner, or of any person
to whom the powers of the Commissioner have
been delegated, as a result of disciplinary proceedings
brought against a police officer appointed by the
Commissioner.
PART  VI
D
UTIES OF THE PERSONNEL DEPARTMENT IN RELATION TO
THE POLICE SERVICE
24. (1) In addition to any duties or powers imposed
or conferred by any other written law, the Personnel
Department shall, in relation to the Police Service, carry
out suc h duties as are imposed on it by this Act and
Powers and duties
Contract officers
Disciplinary powers
No. 7 Police Service 2006 385



without limiting the generality of the foregoing shall
have the following duties:
(a) to maintain the classification of the Police
Service;
(b) to keep under review the remuneration of
police officers; and
(c) to provide for and establish procedures
for consultation and negotiation between
the Department and the appropriate
recognized association in respect of—
(i) the classification of offices;
(ii) any grievances; and
(iii) the terms and conditions of
employment.
(2) The Minister of Finance may make
recommendations with regard to the remuneration to
be paid to police officers.
(3) The Minister of Finance shall, before making
recommendations pursuant to subsection (2)—
(a) consider the requirements of the Police
Service;
(b) take into account the rates of pay and other
terms and conditions of employment
prevailing in Trinidad and Tobago for
similar work outside the Police Service and
the relationship of the duties of the various
grades within the Police Service; and
(c) be guided by the considerations set out in
section 20(2) (a) to (f) of the Industrial
Relations Act.
(4) Before making any recommendation under
subsection (2), the Minister of F inance may require the
Personnel Department to consult with representatives
of the appropriate recognized association with respect to
the matters specified in subsection (1).
25. Where the representatives of the appropriate
recognized association request a consultation with
respect to matters specified in section 24(1) or the
Chap. 88:01
Consultation with
appropriate
recognized
association
386 No. 7 Police Service 2006



Minister of Finance directs that such consultation is
necessary and desirable, the Personnel Department
shall consult with the representatives of such
association in respect of those matters.
26. Where the Personnel Department consults and
negotiates with representatives of the appropriate
recognized association with respect to matters specified
in section 24 at the request of such representatives, the
Personnel Department and the appropriate recognized
association are, within twenty-one days of the com-
mencement of such consultation and negotiation, or
within such further period as may be agreed upon,
unable to reach agreement on any matter, the Personnel
Department or the appropriate recognized association
shall report the matter on which no agreement has been
reached to the Minister of Finance, and on such report
being made a dispute is deemed to exist as to the
matter.
27. (1) Where the Personnel Department, before
making proposals with respect to matters specified
in section 24, does not consult with representatives
of the appropriate recognized association, the
Personnel Department shall submit the proposals to the
appropriate recognized association for consideration
and agreement.
(2) Where the Personnel Department and the
appropriate recognized association are, within twenty-
one days of the submission of the proposals as
mentioned in subsection (1), or within such further
period as may be agreed upon, unable to reach
agreement on any matter, the Personnel Department or
the appropriate recognized association shall report the
matter on which no agreement has been reached to the
Minister of Finance, and on such report being made a
dispute is deemed to exist as to the matter.
Submission of 
proposals to
appropriate
recognized
association for
approval
Where no agreement
reached after
consultation
No.7 Police Service 2006 387



28. (1) Where the Personnel Department and the
appropriate recognized association reach agreement on
any of the matters specified in section 24(1) after
consultation and negotiation in accordance with section
26 or 27, the agreement shall be recorded in writing and
shall be signed by the Chief Personnel Officer on behalf
of the Minister of Finance and by a person designated by
the appropriate recognized association on behalf of the
association.
(2) An agreement recorded and signed in
accordance with subsection (1) shall be binding upon the
State and the police officers to whom the agreement
relates.
29. Notwithstanding section 13(1) of the Civil Service
Act, in the exercise of its duties and functions under
sections 24, 25, 26, 27 and 28 of this Act, the Personnel
Department shall be subject to the directions of the
Minister of Finance.
30. (1) Where a dispute is deemed to exist under
section 26 or 27, the Minister of Finance shall refer the
dispute for settlement to the Special Tribunal within
twenty-one days from the date on which the dispute was
reported to him.
(2) Where the Minister fails to refer the dispute to
the Special Tribunal within the time specified in
subsection (1), the appropriate recognized association
that is a party to the dispute ma y do so within twenty-
one days from the date of the expiration of the time
specified in subsection (1).
(3) For the purpose of this Act, the parties to a
dispute shall be the Chief Personnel Officer and the
appropriate recognized association.
Personnel Department
subject to Minister of
Finance under this
Part
Dispute to be
referred to Special
Tribunal
Agreement to be
recorded and signed
Chap. 23:01
388 No. 7 Police Service 2006



31. (1) The Special Tribunal shall hear and
determine any dispute referred to it under section 30
and shall make an award on the dispute.
(2) An award made by the Special Tribunal shall
be final.
(3) In addition to taking into account any
submission, argument and evidence presented or
tendered by or on behalf of the appropriate recognized
association and the Chief Personnel Officer, the Special
Tribunal in its judgment shall be guided by the
considerations set out in section 20(2)
(a) to (f) of the
Industrial Relations Act.
32. (1) An award made by the Special Tribunal under
section 31 shall be binding on the parties to the dispute
and all police officers to whom the award relates and
shall continue to be binding for a period to be specified
in the award, but not less than five years from the date
upon which the award takes effect.
(2) The Special Tribunal may, with the agreement
of the parties to an a ward, review suc h a ward at any
time after the third anniversary of the making of suc h
award.
PART  VII
P
OLICE SERVICE ASSOCIATIONS
33. A police officer shall not be a member of any trade
union, or any body or association registered under the
Trade Unions Act.
34. Police officers may form associations, and such
associations shall, subject to this Act, be recognized by
the Minister of Finance as appropriate associations for
consultation and negotiation in respect of any of the
matters specified in section 24 and any other matters
concerning police officers.
Award to be binding
on parties for fixed
period
Prohibition against
membership of trade
union
Representation of
police officers
Chap. 88:02
Special Tribunal
power of award
No.7 Police Service 2006 389



35. The President may make regulations setting out
the conditions to be satisfied and the procedure to be
adopted for the recognition by the Minister of Finance of
associations formed pursuant to section 34.
36. (1) Every appropriate recognized association shall
make rules providing for the administration of the
association and for carrying out the objects of the
association, and with respect to such rules the following
provisions shall have effect:
(a) the rules shall contain provisions in respect
of the several matters mentioned in the
Fourth Schedule; and
(b) a copy of the rules and any amendment
shall be delivered by the association to
every police officer who is a member of that
association on demand and on pa yment of
the prescribed sum.
(2) The rules, including any amendment to such
rules, of an association shall be filed with the Registrar
General and have effect from the date on which they are
filed unless some later date is specified from which they
shall have effect.
37. (1) On any complaint in writing signed by not
less than fifty financial members of an association
representing police officers in the Second Division or, in
the case of an association representing police officers in
the First Division, not less than five financial members,
respecting the rules or business of the association, the
Registrar General shall inquire into the complaint and
may either dismiss it or if, after giving the complainants
and the association an opportunity of being heard, he
finds the complaint to be justified ma y either–
(a) so declare, but make no order under this
subsection; or
(b) make an order specifying the steps which
the association must take to remove the
cause for complaint.
Complaints by
members of 
appropriate 
recognized 
association
Regulations 
governing 
recognition
Appropriate 
recognized 
association to make
rules
Fourth Schedule
390 No. 7 Police Service 2006



(2) The Registrar General shall furnish to the
appropriate recognized association a written statement,
with reasons, for any decision which he gives under this
section.
(3) A decision made by the Registrar General
shall be binding on the association and failure to comply
with such a decision shall render the association liable
to withdrawal of recognition by the Minister of Finance.
(4) The Registrar General may order—
(a) the association to pay the complainant a
specified sum out of the funds of the
association; or
(b) a complainant to pay to the association a
specified sum,
in respect of the costs incurred by the complainant or
the association, as the case may be, and such sum shall
be recoverable summarily as a civil debt.
(5) In this section, “complainant” means a
financial member who signs the complaint.
38. On the commencement of this Act, the police
associations established under the former Act shall
continue under this Act as if they were established
under this Act.
PART  VIII
G
ENERAL FUNCTIONS AND OBLIGATIONS OF MEMBERS OF
THE POLICE SERVICE
39. A police officer shall not be debarred from voting
at any election if, under the laws governing the said
election, he has the right to vote.
40. A police officer is disqualified from membership of
the Senate, the House of Representatives, the Tobago
House of Assembly, or a Municipal Corporation.
Recognized police
associations
Police officer voting
Police officer and
political activities
No.7 Police Service 2006 391



41. (1) Subject to this section, a police officer shall
not—
(a) in any public place or in any document or
any other medium of communication,
whether within Trinidad and Tobago or not,
publish any information or express any
opinion on matters of national security
interest or national or international
political controversy;
(b) be a scrutineer under the Representation of
the People Act or the Tobago House of
Assembly Act, 1996 or an election agent or
an assistant to an election agent of a
Parliamentary, Tobago House of Assembly,
or Municipal candidate.
(2) Subsection (1)
(a) shall not apply where—
(a) a police officer is acting in the execution of
his official duties;
(b) the information or opinion is published in
the course of a lecture or address , the
subject matter of which is approved by
the Commissioner, made or given at any
educational institution in the bona fide
pursuit of the professional activity of the
police officer; or
(c) the information or opinion is expressed in
an article or other literary contribution, the
subject matter of which is approved by
the Commissioner, to a journal or other
periodical or document prepared in
the bona fide pursuit of the professional
activity of the police officer.
(3) In this section, “publish” means to communicate
the information or opinion to any other person whether
orally or in writing and includes the broadcasting of
words and pictures by wireless telegraphy or any
Public statements by
police officer on
certain matters
Chap. 2:01
Act No. 40 of 1996
392 No. 7 Police Service 2006



other means; and in relation to any writing means
exhibiting in public or causing to be read or seen or
showing or delivering or causing to be shown or
delivered in order that the writing may be read or seen
by any person.
42. (1) Every police officer of the First Division and
every Inspector shall ex officio be a Justice of the Peace
for Trinidad and Tobago, and shall take the oath of such
a Justice.
(2) A police officer who is a Justice of the Peace
shall at all times act ministerially for the purposes of
the preservation of the peace, the prevention of crime
and the detection and committal of offenders , and for
carrying out the other objects of this Act, but he shall
not in any way act as a judicial officer, either in any
court or in any other manner, except when specially
appointed so to act.
43. Every police officer shall have all such rights,
powers, authorities, privileges and immunities , and is
liable to all such duties and responsibilities, as any
constable duly appointed now has or is subject or liable
to, or may have or be subject or liable to under any
written or unwritten law.
44. Where in any written law power is conferred upon
a police officer of a certain grade, such power may
lawfully be exercised by a police officer of a higher
grade.
45. A police officer—
(a) shall preserve the peace and detect crime
and other breaches of the law;
(b) may arrest, charge and bring before a
summary court a person found committing
any offence rendering him liable to arrest
without w arrant, or whom he reasonably
suspects of having committed any such
offence;
Certain police
officers to be Justices
Every police officer
to be a constable
General power of
police officer
General duties of
police officer
No. 7 Police Service 2006 393



(c) may summon before a summary court a
person whom he reasonably suspects of
committing an offence;
(d) may prosecute a person who commits any
offence;
(e) shall serve and execute at any time, includ-
ing Sundays, all process which he may be
directed to serve or execute;
(f) shall keep order in and within the precincts
and in the vicinity of all courts during all
sittings of such courts;
(g) shall repress internal disturbances; and
(h) shall generally do and perform all the
duties appertaining to the office of a
constable.
46. (1) A police officer may arrest without a
warrant—
(a) a person who is c harged by another person
with committing an aggravated assault in
any case in which such police officer
believes upon reasonable ground that such
assault has been committed although not
within his view, and that by reason of the
recent commission of the offence a w arrant
could not have been obtained for the
apprehension of the offender;
(b) a person who commits a breach of the peace
in his presence;
(c) a person who obstructs a police officer
while in the execution of his duty, or who
has escaped or attempts to escape from
lawful custody;
Power to arrest
without a warrant
394 No. 7 Police Service 2006



(d) a person in whose possession anything is
found which may reasonably be suspected
to have been stolen or who may reasonably
be suspected of having committed an
offence with reference to such thing;
(e) a person whom he finds lying or loitering in
any public or private place or building and
who does not give a satisfactory account of
himself;
(f) a person whom he finds in any public or
private place or building and whom he
suspects upon reasonable grounds of
having committed or being about to commit
an offence; or
(g) a person found ha ving in his possession
without lawful excuse any implement of
housebreaking.
(2) Without prejudice to the powers conferred
upon a police officer by subsection (1), a police officer ,
and all persons whom he may call to his assistance, may
arrest without a w arrant a person who within view of
such police officer commits an offence and whose name
or residence is unknown to suc h police officer and
cannot be ascertained by him.
47. Where a warrant has been issued in respect of a
person charged with an offence, a police officer shall,
notwithstanding that the warrant is not in his posses-
sion, arrest the person charged with the offence, but the
warrant shall, on the demand of the person arrested, be
shown to him as soon as practicable after his arrest.
48. When a w arrant or order of a Magistrate or
Justice is delivered to a constable, he shall, if the time
will permit, deliver the same to the police officer under
whose immediate command he is, and such officer shall
direct one or more of the police officers under his
Power to arrest
without having 
warrant in
possession
Execution of warrant
or order
No. 7 Police Service 2006 395



command and such assistant as he thinks proper to
execute such warrant or order, and every such warrant
or order may be executed by any constable.
49. (1) When an action is brought against a police
officer for an act done in obedience to a warrant or order
of a Magistrate or Justice, the officer shall not be
responsible for any irregularity in the issuing of the
warrant or order or for any want of jurisdiction in the
Magistrate or Justice issuing it.
(2) In any action brought under subsection (1),
the court shall give judgment for the officer if he fulfils
the following conditions:
(a) he gives the warrant or order in evidence;
(b) he proves that the Magistrate or J ustice
signed the warrant or order; and
(c) he proves that the act complained of was
done in obedience to the warrant or order.
50. A police officer ma y take and record for the
purpose of identification the measurement, photograph
or fingerprint impression of a person who is in la wful
custody but if such measurement, photograph or finger-
print impression is taken of a person who has not
previously been convicted of a criminal offence, and such
person is discharged or acquitted by a court, all records
relating to such measurement, photograph or finger-
print impression shall on request be handed over to
such person, or, where no such request is made within
four months, be destroyed.
51. A person who applies to the P olice Service for a
certificate of character shall pay the prescribed fee to
the police officer in charge of the police station at which
the application is made.
Action against police
officer for acting on
warrant or order
Power to take 
measurement,
photograph or 
fingerprint
Certificate of
character
396 No. 7 Police Service 2006



52. A person who applies to the Police Service for
an analysis of a fingerprint impression affixed to a
document shall pay the prescribed fee to the police
officer in charge of the police station at which the
application is made.
53. (1) A police officer who—
(a) begins, raises, abets, countenances or
incites a mutiny, or terrorist act or causes
or joins in any sedition amongst the mem-
bers of the Police Service; or
(b) knows of any actual or intended mutiny,
rebellion, insurrection or terrorist act and
does not without delay give information
thereof to a police officer senior in rank,
commits an offence and is liable on conviction on
indictment to imprisonment for ten years.
(2) A police officer who—
(a) being present at any assemblage tending to
riot, does not use his utmost endeavours to
suppress the same;
(b) assaults a judicial officer or police officer
senior in rank;
(c) draws or lifts, or offers to draw or lift, any
weapon or offers any violence against any
such judicial officer or police officer senior
in rank;
(d) wilfully permits the escape of a prisoner;
(e) uses unnecessary violence to or ill-treats
any prisoner;
(f) pawns, sells, makes away with, abandons
or wilfully spoils or damages his arms,
accoutrements, clothing or any public
property, or
Analysis of finger-
print impression
Punishment for
serious offence
No. 7 Police Service 2006 397



(g) fails to take action in a case where a serious
offence has been committed or where he
has witnessed a serious offence,
is liable on summary conviction to a fine of thirty
thousand dollars and to imprisonment for five years.
54. Unless he is specially authorized to do so by the
regulations, no police officer is entitled to keep or use for
his private benefit any article that has been supplied to
him at the public expense, but he shall hold every such
article at the order and disposal of the State.
55. (1) A police officer who is dismissed from the
Police Service, or resigns his office, or otherwise leaves
the Police Service, shall forthwith deliver over to the
person authorized by the regulations or appointed for
that purpose every article which has been supplied to
him at the public expense and whic h he has not been
expressly authorized to keep or use for his private
benefit.
(2) A police officer who contravenes this section is
liable on summary conviction to a fine of ten thousand
dollars and to imprisonment for two years.
(3) A Magistrate or Justice may issue a warrant
to search for and seize any article mentioned in
subsection (1) which is not so delivered, wherever it may
be found.
56. A person who has in his possession any article
which has been supplied at the public expense to a
police officer, and which the police officer has not been
expressly authorized to keep or use for his private
benefit, and who does not satisfactorily account for its
possession commits an offence, and may be arrested
without warrant by any police officer and is liable on
summary conviction to a fine of ten thousand dollars
and to imprisonment for two years.
Public property not
to be used privately
Delivery up of article
supplied on leaving
the Police Service
Improper possession
of article supplied to
police officer
398 No. 7 Police Service 2006



57. (1) When a police officer dies, the person in whose
custody, control or possession is any article which has
been supplied at the public expense to such police officer
for the execution of his office, shall, after due notice by
any police officer, deliver up to the person appointed for
that purpose any such article.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to any article
that the officer has been expressly authorized to keep
for his private benefit.
(3) A person who contravenes subsection (1) is
liable on summary conviction to a fine of five thousand
dollars and to imprisonment for one year.
(4) A Magistrate or Justice may issue a warrant
to search for and seize any article mentioned in
subsection (1) which is not so delivered over, wherever
the same may be found.
58. (1) Where any property has come into the
possession of the P olice Service in connection with
any criminal charge or under section 29 of
the P awnbrokers Act, a summary court may, on
application either by a police officer or by a
claimant of the property, make an order for the
delivery of the property to the person appearing to
the court to be the owner of it or, if the owner
cannot be ascertained, make such order with
respect to the property as the court thinks fit.
(2) An order under this section shall not affect the
right of any person to take within six months from the
date of the order legal proceedings against any person in
possession of property delivered by virtue of the order
for the recovery of the property, but on the expiration of
those six months the right shall cease.
Delivery up of article
supplied to deceased
police officer
Unclaimed article
Chap. 84:05
No.7 Police Service 2006 399



(3) Where property has come into the possession
of the Police Service—
(a) under subsection (1); or
(b) in respect of which the owner cannot be
ascertained and no order has been made
with respect to it by a court,
it shall be dealt with as follows:
(i) if the property is a perishable
article, or its custody involves
unreasonable expense or
inconvenience, it may be sold as
soon as convenient after it has
come into the possession of the
Police Service;
(ii) if the property consists of money, it
shall be dealt with as provided in
this section with regard to the
proceeds of a sale after it has
remained in the possession of the
Police Service for three months; or
(iii) in the case of any other property
the same may be publicly sold at
auction as soon as possible after it
has remained in the possession of
the Police Service for three
months and has been advertised
in two local daily newspapers for
three consecutive days.
(4) The proceeds of the sale shall, after deduction
of expenses, be paid immediately to the Comptroller of
Accounts who shall deposit it to the credit of the Award
Fund.
400 No. 7 Police Service 2006



(5) Where property has been found by a person,
other than a police officer, and no provision is made for
it to be dealt with by law and it has not been claimed by
the real owner it may be delivered to the finder on his
claiming it, but such delivery to the finder shall not be
made until it has remained in the possession of the
Police Service for three months.
(6) Where property found under subsection (5) is
of such a nature that it necessitates an immediate sale,
it shall be sold immediately and the proceeds of the sale
shall be deposited with the Comptroller of Accounts who
shall credit it to the Award Fund.
(7) Where the owner of the proceeds mentioned in
subsection (6) have not claimed it after three months, it
may be delivered, less any expenses, to the finder on his
claiming it.
(8) In all cases in whic h property deposited with
the Police Service or the proceeds thereof is delivered to
the finder, he may be required to execute a bond of
indemnity to the Police Service in respect of the delivery.
59. A person who assaults , obstructs, or resists a
police officer in the execution of his duty , or aids or
incites another person so to assault, obstruct, or resist a
police officer or a person assisting the police officer in
the execution of his duty, is liable on summary
conviction to a fine of ten thousand dollars and to
imprisonment for two years.
60. If a person is called upon to assist a police officer
who is, while in the execution of his duty, assaulted or
resisted or in danger of being assaulted or resisted, and
such person refuses or neglects to assist accordingly
without reasonable cause , he is liable on summary
conviction to a fine of ten thousand dollars and to
imprisonment for one year.
Assault, etc., on
police officer
Refusing to assist
police officer
assaulted
No.7 Police Service 2006 401



61. (1) A person who—
(a) knowingly harbours or entertains or, either
directly or indirectly, sells or gives any
intoxicating liquor to a police officer who is
on duty;
(b) knowingly permits a police officer to
remain in his house, except in case of
extreme urgency, when on duty; or
(c) by threats or by offer of money, gift, intoxi-
cating liquor or any other thing, induces or
endeavours to induce a police officer to
commit a breach of his duty,
is liable on summary conviction to a fine of fifteen
thousand dollars and to imprisonment for one year.
(2) If a person, who is the owner or occupier of
premises licensed under the Liquor Licences Act or is
employed in connection with the business of any such
premises, is convicted under this section, the record of
the proceedings shall be forwarded to the licensing
committee which granted the licence, and the owner or
occupier is, in addition to any other penalty under this
section, liable to have his licence forfeited or suspended
by that licensing committee.
(3) On the trial of a complaint in respect of an
offence under this section, if the other facts constituting
the offence are established, it shall not be necessary to
prove knowledge or intention, but the onus of disproving
it shall lie upon the defendant.
62. A person, other than a police officer, who without
the written authority of the Commissioner—
(a) puts on or assumes, either in whole or in
part, the uniform, name, designation or
description of a police officer, or a uniform,
name, or designation, resembling and
intended to resemble the uniform, name or
designation of a police officer; or
Harbouring police
officer
Chap. 84:10
Impersonation of
police officer or
wearing police
uniform, etc.
402 No. 7 Police Service 2006



(b) in any way pretends to be a police officer for
any purpose which he would not by law be
entitled to do of his own authority,
is liable on summary conviction to a fine of thirty
thousand dollars and to imprisonment for three years.
63. (1) A person who, for the purpose of obtaining
admission into the Police Service, knowingly—
(a) uses or attempts to pass off a forged or false
certificate, letter or other document; or
(b) makes a false answer to a question which is
put to him by a police officer,
is liable on summary conviction to a fine of ten
thousand dollars and to imprisonment for one year.
(2) A police officer ma y arrest without w arrant a
person whom he reasonably believes has committed an
offence under this section.
64. Where a police officer lays an information or
makes a complaint against a person,any police officer of
or above the rank of sergeant may appear before the
Magistrate or J ustice who is trying or enquiring  into
the matter of the information or complaint, and shall
have the same privileges as to addressing the
Magistrate or J ustice, and as to examining the
witnesses adduced in the matter , as the police officer
who laid the information or made the complaint would
have had.
65. The Award Fund continued under the former Act
shall continue to be kept by the Commissioner and
administered in accordance with this Act, and shall be
appropriated to the payment of such—
(a) gratuities and awards as the Commissioner
may direct to be paid to a police officer;
(b) compassionate gratuities to the spouse
and children of a police officer as,
in exceptional circumstances , the
Commissioner may allow;
Obtaining admission
into the Police
Service by fraud
Right to prosecute
police cases
Award Fund
No.7 Police Service 2006 403



(c) compassionate gratuities to any person
dependent on a deceased police officer,
other than his spouse and children as, in
exceptional circumstances, the Commissioner
may allow;
(d) award as, under section 67, a Judge of the
High Court or Magistrate may grant to a
police officer;
(e) special compensation as the Commissioner
may award to a police officer for injuries
he sustained in the performance of his
function; or
(f) sums as may become payable to finders of
property sold under section 58.
66. (1) The Awards Board (herein referred to as “the
Board”) established under the former Act shall continue
under this Act as if it is established under this Act.
(2) The Board shall meet at least once in every
quarter to consider and recommend awards in
accordance with section 65.
(3) The appropriate recognized association is
entitled to submit recommendations for awards to the
Commissioner who shall transmit them to the Board for
its consideration.
67. If, during the trial of a criminal case, the Judge or
Magistrate before whom the case is being tried is of the
opinion that a police officer has distinguished himself
in apprehending or detecting and bringing to justice
the perpetrator or abettor of any crime, the Judge or
Magistrate is entitled to grant an a ward, not exceeding
five hundred dollars, to the police officer; and such an
award shall be paid on the certificate of the J udge or
Magistrate.
Awards Board
Granting of special
award
404 No. 7 Police Service 2006



68. (1) All fines or penalties imposed upon a police
officer under this Act shall be retained from his pay by
the deduction of no more than half the amount which
may be due to him on any day of payment until the
whole be paid, and shall be paid to the credit of the
Award Fund.
(2) A bribe or gift of money coming into the
possession of a police officer or the value of any goods
given as a bribe to a police officer shall be paid to the
credit of the Award Fund.
69. (1) The Commissioner shall—
(a) keep an account of all moneys paid into and
disbursed from the Award Fund;
(b) submit to the Auditor General at the end of
each month a statement showing all
receipts and disbursements;
(c) state in the statement the reasons and
authority for each disbursement; and
(d) deposit all moneys received for the credit of
the Award Fund as soon as practicable in a
financial institution, approved by the
Minister.
(2) When the sum standing to the credit of
the Award Fund exceeds fifty thousand dollars the
Commissioner shall decide to what purpose the surplus
shall be put.
PART  IX
M
ISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
70. (1) Notwithstanding any written law to the
contrary, the Canteen steward of a police Canteen and
the secretary of a Mess Committee may sell intoxicating
liquor to police officers and honorary members in any
such Canteen or Mess without having previously
obtained a licence for that purpose.
Fines and bribes to
be payable to the
Fund
Account to be kept
Sale of liquor in
Canteens and
Messes
No. 7 Police Service 2006 405



(2) The Canteen and Mess Committee shall make
rules in regard to the hours during which a Canteen or
Mess shall be kept open for the sale of intoxicating
liquor and for the proper management and control of
Canteens and Messes.
(3) A police Canteen or Mess shall be managed by
a Canteen or Mess Committee respectively, which shall
consist of the Deputy Commissioner, Administration,
as Chairman, and such other members as may be
determined by the Chairman and the appropriate
recognized association.
71. (1) Every police station is deemed to be a lock-up
in which a person charged with an offence may be
temporarily confined.
(2) In every police station there shall be provided
a secure place of confinement.
72. A police officer shall, on his first appointment,
take and subscribe the oath or affirmation of office and
secrecy set out in the Fifth Schedule.
73. A police officer may leave the Police Service only
by the modes prescribed.
74. (1) A police officer in the Second Division shall
retire from the Police Service on his attaining the age of
fifty-five years but may, with the approval of the
Commissioner, be permitted to retire on his attaining
the age of fifty years.
(2) A police officer in the First Division shall
retire from the Police Service on his attaining the age of
sixty years, but may—
(a) at his option; or
(b) at the instance of the Commissioner,
retire from the P olice Service at any time after he has
attained the age of fifty-five years.
Police station to be
lock-up
Police officer to take
oath of office
Mode of leaving 
service
Age of retirement for
police officer
Fifth Schedule
406 No. 7 Police Service 2006



(3) Subject to subsection (2), a police officer in the
First Division who has attained the age of fifty years
may, with the approval of the Commissioner, be
permitted to retire from the Police Service at anytime
after he has attained that age.
(4) The functions of the Commissioner under
subsections (2) and (3) shall, in relation to the
Commissioner and a Deputy Commissioner, be
performed by the Commission.
75. Notwithstanding section 74 and any other
written law—
(a) the President may in relation to a police
officer in the First Division; or 
(b) the Commissioner may in relation to a
police officer in the Second Division,
where he considers it in the national interest, extend the
years of service of the police officer after he has reached
the prescribed age of retirement, for a period of one year
in the first instance and thereafter, subject to an
annual review, for a maximum of two further periods of
one year each.
76. When a police officer dies the Minister shall order
that three months salary of the officer , from the date of
his death, shall be paid to his spouse, children or other
next of kin.
77. (1) On the death of a police officer to whom any
sum of money may then be due on account of salary
or pension c hargeable on the revenue of the State,
the Minister may, by Order, on being satisfied of
the expediency in such case of dispensing with the
production of a grant of probate or letters of adminis -
tration, cause suc h sum to be paid to a person he
considers entitled to it, without requiring the production
of the grant of probate or letters of administration.
Extension of service
Grant of  three months
salary to next of kin
of deceased police
officer
Payment of arrears
of salary or pension
without production of
probate or letters of
administration
No. 7 Police Service 2006 407



(2) A payment made under subsection (1) is valid
against any person and a person acting under this
section is absolutely discharged from all liability in
respect of any money paid to him under this section.
78. The President may make regulations, subject to
the affirmative resolution of the House of
Representatives, to give effect to the purpose of this Act,
and in particular for the following matters:
(a) for prescribing classifications for offices in
the Police Service, including qualifications,
duties and remuneration;
(b) for prescribing the procedure for
appointments from within the Police
Service;
(c ) for prescribing periods of probation;
(d) for prescribing the procedure for the
recovery of any penalty from a police
officer;
(e) for regulating the hours of attendance of
police officers and the keeping and signing
of records of attendance or for prescribing
other methods of recording attendance;
(f) for regulating the duties to be performed by
police officers;
(g) for regulating the granting of leave to
police officers;
(h) for prescribing arrangements and
procedures for providing , assisting in or
co-ordinating staff development
programmes;
Regulations
408 No. 7 Police Service 2006



(i) the appointment, training and discipline of
the police officers;
(j) the description and issue of arms,
ammunition, accoutrements, uniform and
necessaries to be supplied to the Police
Service;
(k) for prescribing the procedures for pensions,
gratuities and injury allowance to be
granted in respect of the services of police
officers;
(l) for prescribing and providing for the use of
powers under this Act;
(m) for regulating generally the terms and
conditions of employment, including
temporary employment and employment
on contract;
(n) promotion, secondment, transfer and
removal from office; and
(o) generally, for the good order and manage-
ment of the Police Service.
79. (1) All legal or disciplinary proceedings pending,
under the former Act prior to the coming into force of
this Act shall continue as if this Act had not been
passed.
(2) All decisions made or issued or in force or all
things done under the former Act prior to the coming
into force of this Act shall continue to have full force and
effect as if commenced, made, issued or done under this
Act.
80. The Police Service Act is repealed.
Savings
Repeal
Chap. 15:01
No. 7 Police Service 2006 409



FIRST  SCHEDULE
[Section 7(2)]
OFFICES IN THE FIRST DIVISION OF THE POLICE SERVICE
Commissioner
Deputy Commissioner
Assistant Commissioner
Senior Superintendent
Superintendent
Assistant Superintendent
SECOND  SCHEDULE
[Section 7(3)]
O
FFICES IN THE SECOND DIVISION OF THE POLICE SERVICE
Inspector
Sergeant
Corporal
Constable
THIRD  SCHEDULE
[Section 4(1), 6]
C
LASSIFICATION OF OFFICES IN THE POLICE SERVICE
Old Title of Post New Title of Post Effective
Date
GRADE 1
Police Band Apprentice Police Band Apprentice 1.10.03
GRADE 2
Police Bandsman I Police Bandsman I 1.10.03
Police Constable Police Constable 1.10.03
410 No. 7 Police Service 2006



THIRD  SCHEDULE—CONTINUED
[Section 4(1), 6]
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFICES IN THE POLICE SERVICE
Old Title of Post New Title of Post Effective
Date
GRADE 3
Police Bandsman II Police Bandsman II 1.10.03
Police Corporal Police Corporal 1.10.03
GRADE 4
Police Bandsman III Police Bandsman III 1.10.03
Police Sergeant Police Sergeant 1.10.03
G
RADE 5
Assistant Director of Assistant Director of 1.10.03
Police Band Police Band
Police Inspector Police Inspector 1.10.03
GRADE 6
Deputy Director of Deputy Director of 1.10.03
Police Band Police Band
Assistant Superintendent Assistant Superintendent 1.10.03
of Police of Police 
GRADE 7
Director of Police Band Director of Police Band 1.10.03
Superintendent of Police Superintendent of Police 1.10.03
G
RADE 8
Senior Superintendent Senior Superintendent 1.10.03
of Police of Police
GRADE 9
Assistant Commissioner Assistant Commissioner 1.10.03
of Police of Police
No.7 Police Service 2006 411



FOURTH   SCHEDULE
[Section 36(1)]
MATTERS TO BE INCLUDED IN RULES OF A POLICE ASSOCIATION
1. The name of the Association and the place of meeting for its
business.
2. The objects for which the Association is to be established,
the purposes for which its funds shall be applicable, and the
conditions under which any member may become entitled to any
benefit assured thereby, and the fines and forfeitures to be imposed
on any member of the Association.
3. The manner of making , altering, amending and rescinding
rules.
4. A provision for the appointment and removal of a general
committee of management, of a trustee, treasurer and other
officers.
5. A provision for the investment of the funds, and for an
annual or periodical audit of accounts.
6. The inspecting of the books and names of members of the
Association by every person having an interest in its funds.
7. The manner of dissolution.
8. The protection of voting rights of members of the
Association and the general conduct of elections.
9. The powers, duties and functions of the Executive
Committee of the Association.
10. Method to resolve disputes between the members of the
Association and the members of the Executive Committee.
11. Prohibition against admission to membership with respect
to a police officer who is a member of an appropriate recognized
association.
412 No. 7 Police Service 2006



FIFTH  SCHEDULE
[Section 72]
OATH*/AFFIRMATION* OF OFFICE AND SECRECY
I, .............................................. do swear*/do solemnly and sincerely
affirm* that I will well and truly serve Trinidad and Tobago in the
office of .......................................... without favour or affection,
malice or ill will, and that I will cause the peace to be kept and
preserved in Trinidad and Tobago, and that I will prevent, to the
utmost of my power, all offences against the same; and that while I
shall continue to hold the said office I will, to the best of my skill
and knowledge, discharge all the duties thereof faithfully according
to law and will not, without due authority in that behalf, in any
manner whatsoever publish or communicate any facts or informa-
tion being facts or expressions of opinion based on suc h facts that
come to my knowledge by reason of my being the holder of suc h
office. So help me God.†
* delete whichever is inapplicable.
† delete in case of affirmation.
Passed in the House of Representatives this 27th da y
of March, 2006.
J. SAMPSON
Clerk of the House
Passed in the Senate this 28th da y of March, 2006.
J. SANDY
Acting Clerk of the Senate
No. 7 Police Service 2006 413
PRINTED BY THE GOVERNMENT PRINTER,P ORT-OF-SPAIN
REPUBLIC OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO—2006