Current Authorised Pages
                                              Pages                   Authorised
                                            (inclusive)                 by L.R.O.
                                                1–14           ..               
                                                    
SPECIAL  RESERVE  POLICE  ACT
CHAPTER  15:03
Act
14 of 1946
Amended by
20 of 1953
38 of 1967
45 of 1979
2 of 2013
LAWS  OF  TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO
L.R.O. 
MINISTRY  OF  THE  ATTORNEY  GENERAL  AND  LEGAL  AFFAIRS
www.legalaffairs.gov.tt
UNOFFICIAL  VERSION 
 
UPDATED  TO  31ST  DECEMBER  2016



Note on Subsidiary Legislation
The following Subsidiary Legislation have been omitted:
(a) Special Reserve Police (Extra Duty Pay) Regulations (GN 27/1970);
(b) Gratuity Approval Resolution (GN 36/1971).
Note on Adaptation
Under paragraph 6 of the Second Schedule to the Law Revision Act (Ch. 3:03) the Commission
amended certain references to public officers in this Chapter.  The Minister’s approval of the
amendments was signified by LN 120/1980, but no marginal reference is made to this Notice
where any such amendment is made in the text.
2                   Chap. 15:03                 Special Reserve Police
LAWS  OF  TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO
MINISTRY  OF  THE  ATTORNEY  GENERAL  AND  LEGAL  AFFAIRS
www.legalaffairs.gov.tt
UNOFFICIAL  VERSION 
 
UPDATED  TO  31ST  DECEMBER  2016



                                      Special Reserve Police                 Chap. 15:03                   3
LAWS  OF  TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO
L.R.O. 
        1.   Short title.
        2.   Interpretation.
        3.   Special Reserve Police established.
        4.   Duties.
        5.   Disciplinary punishment.
        6.   Command.
        7.   Number and distribution of Special Reserve Police.
        8.   Qualification for appointment.
        9.   Appointment of members.
      10.   Precept of appointment and oath of office.
      11.   Resignation.
      12.   Revocation of appointment.
      13.   Penalty for refusing to serve.
      14.   Delivery of articles supplied on leaving.
      15.   Delivery up of articles having belonged to a deceased member.
      16.   Reward Fund.
      17.   Account to be kept.
`  17A.   Duty allowance.
      18.   Powers of members of Special Reserve Police.
      19.   Workmen’s Compensation Act.
      20.   Personation of member of the Special Reserve Police.
      21.   Members of body of Police established under Defence Regulations
deemed to be members of Special Reserve Police.
      22.   Regulations.
SCHEDULE.
SECTION
CHAPTER  15:03
SPECIAL  RESERVE  POLICE   ACT
ARRANGEMENT  OF  SECTIONS
MINISTRY  OF  THE  ATTORNEY  GENERAL  AND  LEGAL  AFFAIRS
www.legalaffairs.gov.tt
UNOFFICIAL  VERSION 
 
UPDATED  TO  31ST  DECEMBER  2016



1950 Ed. 
Ch. 11 No. 3.
14 of 1946.
Commencement.
Short title.
Interpretation.
[38 of 1967
45 of 1979].
Ch. 15:01.
CHAPTER  15:03
SPECIAL  RESERVE  POLICE  ACT
An Act to provide for the establishment of a Special
Reserve Police service.
[11TH APRIL 1946]
        1. This Act may be cited as the Special Reserve Police Act.
      2. In this Act—
“Commissioner” and “Deputy Commissioner” mean respectively
the persons appointed to the offices of Commissioner of
Police and Deputy Commissioner of Police in accordance
with section 123 of the Constitution;
“constable” means a constable appointed under this Act;
“dependants” means such of the members of the family of the
deceased member of the Special Reserve Police as were
wholly or in part dependent upon his income at the time of
his death, and where such member of the Special Reserve
Police, being the parent or grandparent of an illegitimate
child, leaves such a child so dependent upon his income, or,
being an illegitimate child leaves a parent or grandparent so
dependent upon his income, shall include such an
illegitimate child and parent or grandparent respectively.
However, a person shall not be deemed to be a partial
dependent of a member of the Special Reserve Police unless
he was dependent partially on contributions from the
member for the provision of the ordinary necessities of life
suitable for persons in his class and position;
“district” and “division” mean police district and division as
defined for the purposes of the Police Service Act;
“First Division Officer” means any of the officers specified in the
First Schedule to the Police Service Act;
“Police Service” means the Police Service established by
section 3 of the Police Service Act.
4                   Chap. 15:03                 Special Reserve Police
LAWS  OF  TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO
MINISTRY  OF  THE  ATTORNEY  GENERAL  AND  LEGAL  AFFAIRS
www.legalaffairs.gov.tt
UNOFFICIAL  VERSION 
 
UPDATED  TO  31ST  DECEMBER  2016



                                      Special Reserve Police                 Chap. 15:03                   5
LAWS  OF  TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO
L.R.O. 
Special Reserve
Police
established.
Ch. 15:02.
Duties.
[38 of 1967
45 of 1979].
        3.  In addition to the supplemental bodies of Police
established under the Supplemental Police Act, a new
supplemental body of Police styled “Special Reserve Police” shall
be established under this Act.
      4. (1)  The Special Reserve Police or any part thereof may
be called out for service by the Commissioner, Deputy
Commissioner or any other First Division Officer in cases of
external aggression or internal disturbance, actual or threatened.
            (2) The Commissioner may, whenever additional
police may be required for the preservation of good order, the
protection of persons or property or the performance of any other
duty exercisable by members of the Police Service, call out
members of the Special Reserve Police on full-time, part-time
or temporary service.
            (3) Every member of the Special Reserve Police shall
whether or not he has been called out for service under this section
attend and carry out such parades and drills in such places and at
such times and in such manner as may be ordered by the officer in
command of his division, and when he has been called out for
service under this section, shall carry out such duties of the Police
Service and in such places and at such times and in such manner
as may be ordered by the Commissioner or Deputy Commissioner
or any other First Division Officer or by the officer in command
of the division or by any member of the Special Reserve Police
who is senior to him.
            (4) Every member of the Special Reserve Police shall,
while on parade or at drill or on duty obey all lawful orders which
may be given to him by the Commissioner or Deputy
Commissioner or any other First Division Officer or by the
officer in command of the division or by any member of the
Special Reserve Police who is senior to him.
            (5) No member of the Special Reserve Police shall
leave his division during any period in which the Special Reserve
Police is called out for service under subsection (1) without the
permission of the officer in command of the division, and if the
MINISTRY  OF  THE  ATTORNEY  GENERAL  AND  LEGAL  AFFAIRS
www.legalaffairs.gov.tt
UNOFFICIAL  VERSION 
 
UPDATED  TO  31ST  DECEMBER  2016



permission is granted he shall comply with any conditions
attached to the permission.
        5. (1)  Every member of the Special Reserve Police who
commits any of the following offences:
                    (a) insubordination;
                    (b) wilful disobedience of a lawful order;
                    (c) any contravention of section 4(5);
                    (d) absence from parade, drill, or duty without leave;
                    (e) making away with, pawning, selling, losing by
carelessness or wilfully damaging a uniform or
any part thereof or any article which has been
supplied to him at the public expense for the
performance of his duties as a member of the
Special Reserve Police;
                    (f) any act, conduct or neglect to the prejudice of
good order and discipline or in violation of duty
in his office, or any other misconduct as a
member of the Special Reserve Police,
shall on conviction before the officer in command of his division
be liable to one or more of the following punishments:
                              (i)   dismissal;
                            (ii)   reduction to a lower rank;
                          (iii)   a fine not exceeding one hundred and
fifty dollars;
                            (iv)   extra parades, drill and duties.
            (2) Any member of the Special Reserve Police who is
dissatisfied with the decision of his senior officer in any matter
may appeal to the Commissioner, who may make such order as
the circumstances may require, and whose decision shall be final.
            (3) The Commissioner may, without any appeal, reduce
any punishment imposed by any senior officer on any member of
the Special Reserve Police and no sentence of dismissal shall be
valid until confirmed in writing by the Commissioner.
Disciplinary
punishment.
[45 of 1979].
6                   Chap. 15:03                 Special Reserve Police
LAWS  OF  TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO
MINISTRY  OF  THE  ATTORNEY  GENERAL  AND  LEGAL  AFFAIRS
www.legalaffairs.gov.tt
UNOFFICIAL  VERSION 
 
UPDATED  TO  31ST  DECEMBER  2016



                                      Special Reserve Police                 Chap. 15:03                   7
LAWS  OF  TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO
L.R.O. 
            (4) A member of the Special Reserve Police shall not
be convicted unless the charge against him has been investigated
in his presence and he has been given sufficient opportunity to
defend himself.
        6. Subject to the general order and directions of the
Minister, the Commissioner shall have the general command and
superintendence of the Special Reserve Police, and he shall be
responsible to the Minister for their efficient condition and for the
proper carrying out of this Act.
      7. (1)  Subject to the provisions mentioned above, the
Special Reserve Police in each division shall consist of such
numbers and ranks as may from time to time be directed by the
Commissioner, with the sanction of the Minister.
            (2) The powers and authority of any member of the
Special Reserve Police under this Act may be exercised in any
part of Trinidad and Tobago.
        8.  Every male person who is—
                    (a) over 18 years of age;
                    (b) able-bodied; and
                    (c) of good character,
shall be deemed to be qualified for appointment as a member of
the Special Reserve Police.
        9. The Commissioner may by writing under his hand appoint
fit and proper persons to be members of the Special Reserve Police
and such members shall be assigned such ranks and be posted to
such division or district as the Commissioner may direct.
      10.  (1)  On appointing any person to be a member of the
Special Reserve Police under this Act, the Commissioner shall
deliver or cause to be delivered to him a precept authorising him
to act as such.
            (2) The precept may be in the form contained in
the Schedule.
Command.
Number and
distribution of
Special Reserve
Police.
[45 of 1979].
Qualification
for appointment.
Appointment of
members.
[45 of 1979].
Precept of
appointment and
oath of office.
[20 of 1953
45 of 1979].
Schedule.
MINISTRY  OF  THE  ATTORNEY  GENERAL  AND  LEGAL  AFFAIRS
www.legalaffairs.gov.tt
UNOFFICIAL  VERSION 
 
UPDATED  TO  31ST  DECEMBER  2016



            (3) When he receives the precept, the person who is
appointed shall take and subscribe, before any First Division
Officer, the following oath of office:
            I,.................. of ........................, do swear that I will well
and truly serve the State as a member of the Special Reserve
Police for Trinidad and Tobago; so help me God.
            (4) On receiving the precept and taking and subscribing
the oath, the person who is appointed shall become a member of
the Special Reserve Police established under the provisions of
this Act.
      11.  Any member of the Special Reserve Police may at any
time on giving one month’s notice in writing to the
Commissioner resign his appointment as a member.
      12.  The appointment of any member of the Special Reserve
Police may be revoked at any time by the Commissioner.
      13.  Any member of the Special Reserve Police who, without
reasonable cause, neglects or refuses to serve when called out by
the Commissioner, the Deputy Commissioner or any other First
Division Officer shall, unless he is dealt with under section 5, be
liable on summary conviction to a fine of three hundred dollars
or to imprisonment for one month.
      14.  (1) Every member of the Special Reserve Police who
resigns his appointment or otherwise ceases to form part of the
Special Reserve Police shall forthwith deliver up to the person
appointed by the Commissioner for that purpose every article
whatsoever which has been supplied to him at the public expense
for the performance of his duties as a member of the Special
Reserve Police and which he has not been expressly authorised to
keep or use for his private benefit.
            (2) Every person who fails to comply with this section is
liable on summary conviction to a fine of three hundred dollars or
to imprisonment for three months and any Magistrate or Justice
Resignation.
[45 of 1979].
Revocation of
appointment.
[45 of 1979].
Penalty for
refusing to
serve.
[38 of 1967 
45 of 1979].
Delivery of
articles supplied
on leaving.
[45 of 1979].
8                   Chap. 15:03                 Special Reserve Police
LAWS  OF  TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO
MINISTRY  OF  THE  ATTORNEY  GENERAL  AND  LEGAL  AFFAIRS
www.legalaffairs.gov.tt
UNOFFICIAL  VERSION 
 
UPDATED  TO  31ST  DECEMBER  2016



                                      Special Reserve Police                 Chap. 15:03                   9
LAWS  OF  TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO
L.R.O. 
Delivery up of
articles having
belonged to a
deceased
member.
[45 of 1979].
Reward Fund.
[45 of 1979].
Account to be
kept.
may issue a warrant to search for and seize all such articles as
aforesaid which are not so delivered up, wherever the same may
be found, and to arrest the person in whose possession the same
may be found.
      15.  (1)  When any member of the Special Reserve Police dies
any person in possession of any articles which had been supplied
to such member at the public expense for the performance of his
duties as a member of the Special Reserve Police, shall be bound,
within fourteen days after the death, to deliver any such articles
over to the member of the Police Service in charge of the Police
Station nearest to which such person resides.
            (2) Any person who contravenes this section is liable on
summary conviction to a fine of one hundred and fifty dollars or to
imprisonment for two months; and any Magistrate or Justice may
issue his warrant to search for and seize all such articles which are
not so delivered up, wherever the same may be found, and to arrest
the person in whose possession the same may be found.
      16.  There shall be established in the manner hereinafter
mentioned a fund to be called the Special Reserve Police Reward
Fund (in this Act referred to as the “Reward Fund”) and the fund
shall be kept by the Commissioner and administered in the manner
directed by this Act and shall be appropriated to the payment of—
                    (a) such rewards as the Minister may from time to
time award or direct to be paid to members of
the Special Reserve Police; and
                    (b) such special compensation for injuries received
by members of the Special Reserve Police in the
execution of their duty as the Minister may from
time to time award.
      17.  The Commissioner shall keep an account of all moneys
paid into and disbursed from the Reward Fund, and shall submit to
the Auditor General at the end of each month a statement showing
all receipts and disbursements and shall state thereon the reasons
MINISTRY  OF  THE  ATTORNEY  GENERAL  AND  LEGAL  AFFAIRS
www.legalaffairs.gov.tt
UNOFFICIAL  VERSION 
 
UPDATED  TO  31ST  DECEMBER  2016



and authority for each disbursement, and shall deposit all moneys
received for the credit of the Reward Fund as soon as practicable
in the Post Office Savings Bank to a special account. When the
sum standing to the credit of the Reward Fund exceeds two
thousand four hundred dollars the Minister shall decide to what
purpose the surplus shall be put.
*17A.  Notwithstanding any other provision in this Act or in any
other written law, the President may by Order, grant a duty
allowance to members of the Special Reserve Police.
      18.  (1)  Every member of the Special Reserve Police while
on duty in the capacity of a member shall have, exercise and enjoy
all the powers, authorities, privileges and immunities, and shall
perform all the duties and have all the responsibilities of a member
of the Police Service constituted under the Police Service Act.
            (2) A member of the Special Reserve Police shall be
deemed to be on duty in the capacity of a member when he is
called out for service under section 4(1) or (2).
            (3) Any fine imposed on a member of the Special
Reserve Police under section 5 may be deducted from any pay to
which he is or may become entitled under this Act, and, if so
deducted, shall be paid to the credit of the Reward Fund; and any
bribe or gift of money coming into the possession of any such
member, and the value of any goods given as a bribe to any such
member, shall be paid to the credit of the said Fund.
      19.  Members of the Special Reserve Police shall not be
regarded as workmen for the purposes of the Workmen’s
Compensation Act, but the principles of that Act may be followed
in computing compensation granted under this Act in respect of
permanent disability or death.
      20.  (1)  Any person not being a member of the Special
Reserve  Police who in any way pretends to be a member thereof
for the purpose of doing any act which such person would not be
entitled to do, if not a member of the Special Reserve Police, called
out for service, is liable on summary conviction to a fine of seven
hundred and fifty dollars or to imprisonment for three months.
Duty allowance.
[2 of 2013].
Powers of
members of
Special Reserve
Police.
[38 of 1967].
Ch. 15:01.
Workmen’s
Compensation
Act.
Ch. 88:05.
[38 of 1967].
Personation of
member of the
Special Reserve
Police.
10                 Chap. 15:03                 Special Reserve Police
LAWS  OF  TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO
*Section 17A took effect from 1st October 2012.
MINISTRY  OF  THE  ATTORNEY  GENERAL  AND  LEGAL  AFFAIRS
www.legalaffairs.gov.tt
UNOFFICIAL  VERSION 
 
UPDATED  TO  31ST  DECEMBER  2016



                                      Special Reserve Police                 Chap. 15:03                 11
LAWS  OF  TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO
L.R.O. 
            (2) Any person who has in his possession any badge or
baton or other equipment furnished for the use of a member of the
Special Reserve Police and who does not satisfactorily account
for his possession thereof, is liable on summary conviction, in
addition to any other punishment to which he has subjected
himself, to a fine of seven hundred and fifty dollars or to
imprisonment for three months.
      21.  Members of the Special Reserve Police established under
the Defence (Special Reserve Police) Regulations 1942 at the
date of the commencement of this Act of any rank shall be
deemed to be members of the Special Reserve Police established
under this Act and to hold corresponding ranks therein and it shall
not be necessary for the Commissioner to deliver a precept to any
such member nor for any such member to take the oath of office
prescribed by section 10.
      22.  (1)  The Minister may make Regulations generally for
giving effect to the provisions of the Act.
            (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the power
conferred by subsection (1), Regulations made under that
subsection may provide for—
                    (a) the organisation of the Special Reserve Police;
                    (b) the establishment of different ranks and the
precedence and command to be had or exercised
by the holders of such ranks;
                    (c) the conditions of service, enrolment, promotion,
demotion, resignation, dismissal or suspension
of members of the Special Reserve Police;
                    (d) the training of members of the Special
Reserve Police;
                    (e) the discipline and guidance of the Special
Reserve Police;
                    (f) the setting up of Disciplinary Boards to
investigate breaches of discipline and to award
punishment, if necessary, and the powers and
duties of the Disciplinary Boards;
Members of
body of Police
established
under Defence
Regulations
deemed to be
members of
Special Reserve
Police.
Regulations.
[38 of 1967].
MINISTRY  OF  THE  ATTORNEY  GENERAL  AND  LEGAL  AFFAIRS
www.legalaffairs.gov.tt
UNOFFICIAL  VERSION 
 
UPDATED  TO  31ST  DECEMBER  2016



                    (g) ensuring the compulsory attendance of
witnesses and the production of documents
before any Disciplinary Board;
                    (h)  the payment of wages and of subsistence
allowances, travelling allowances and out of
pocket expenses to members of the Special
Reserve Police and the rates at which and
conditions upon which such wages or
allowances or both shall be paid to different
ranks of the Special Reserve Police;
                    (i) medical attention and examination of any
member of the Special Reserve Police who
sustains injury whilst on duty;
                    (j) the grant to members of the Special Reserve
Police who are injured in the execution of their
duty of sick benefit and the conditions upon
which and the rates at which the benefit shall be
payable to members of different ranks;
                    (k) the grant to members of the Special Reserve
Police who consequent upon injuries received
in the course of their duty as such are permanently
incapacitated from following their normal
employment or whose earning power in such
employment is impaired, pensions or gratuities
and the conditions upon which and the rates at
which such pensions or gratuities may be granted
to different ranks of the Special Reserve Police;
                    (l) the grant, subject to the following conditions and
such other conditions as may be prescribed, at
such rates as may be prescribed, of a pension or
gratuity to the widow and child or children, or
dependent, of any member of the Special Reserve
Police who dies as a result of injuries received:
                              (i)   in the actual discharge of his duty; and
                            (ii)   without his own default; and
                            (iii)   on account of circumstances specially
attributable to the nature of his duty;
12                 Chap. 15:03                 Special Reserve Police
LAWS  OF  TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO
MINISTRY  OF  THE  ATTORNEY  GENERAL  AND  LEGAL  AFFAIRS
www.legalaffairs.gov.tt
UNOFFICIAL  VERSION 
 
UPDATED  TO  31ST  DECEMBER  2016



                                      Special Reserve Police                 Chap. 15:03                 13
LAWS  OF  TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO
L.R.O. 
                  (m)  supplies, accommodation and uniform of
members of the Special Reserve Police;
                    (n)  controlling the use of transport for the
carrying out of duties by members of the
Special Reserve Police.
            (3)  Regulations made under paragraphs (h), (j), (k), and
(l) of subsection (2) shall be subject to negative resolution
of Parliament.
            (4)  Notwithstanding the repeal by the Special Reserve
Police (Amendment) Act 1967 of the former sections 12, 20(2)
and 21(1), (2) and (3), these sections and any Rules or
Regulations respecting the Special Reserve Police shall remain in
force and continue to have effect until other provisions are
substituted therefor by Regulations made under this section.
            (5)  For the purposes of subsection (2)(l)“child” includes—
                    (a) a posthumous child;
                    (b) a stepchild or illegitimate child born before the
date of the injury and wholly or mainly
dependent upon the deceased member of the
Special Reserve Police for support; and
                    (c) an adopted child, adopted in a manner recognised,
by law, before the date of the injury, and wholly or
mainly dependent upon the deceased member of
the Special Reserve Police for support.
38 of 1967.
MINISTRY  OF  THE  ATTORNEY  GENERAL  AND  LEGAL  AFFAIRS
www.legalaffairs.gov.tt
UNOFFICIAL  VERSION 
 
UPDATED  TO  31ST  DECEMBER  2016



14                 Chap. 15:03                 Special Reserve Police
LAWS  OF  TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO
Section 10(2). SCHEDULE
FORM  OF  PRECEPT
REPUBLIC  OF  TRINIDAD  AND  TOBAGO.
SPECIAL  RESERVE  POLICE  ACT
To ............................................................ of ....................................................................
I, ........................... , Commissioner of Police, do under and by virtue of the power and
authority in me vested by the Special Reserve Police Act, hereby appoint you to be a
..................... and I do issue to you this precept authorising you to act as a .....................          
Dated this ............................... day of ........................................ 20....... .
..................................................
Commissioner of Police
MINISTRY  OF  THE  ATTORNEY  GENERAL  AND  LEGAL  AFFAIRS
www.legalaffairs.gov.tt
UNOFFICIAL  VERSION 
 
UPDATED  TO  31ST  DECEMBER  2016