 
                                                                                                                                                         180 1 
THE POLICE SERVICE REGULATIONS, 2007 
Arrangement of Regulations 
 
Regulation 
 
1. Citation and commencement 
2. Interpretation 
 
PART I – RECRUITMENT AND APPOINTMENT 
3. Qualification for appointment as trainee  
4. Recruitment procedure for trainee 
5. Qualification for appointment as Band Apprentice 
6. Recruitment procedure for Band Apprentice 
7. Appointment and discharge of Band Apprentice 
8. Service number and name tag 
9. Appointment to the First Division 
10. Date of appointment 
 
PART II – PROBATION AND PROMOTION 
11. Probation of constable 
12. Principles applicable to constable on probation 
13. Probationary assessment of constable on first appointment 
14. Dismissal of constable on probation 
15. Examination Board  
16. Qualifying examination 
17. Constables are eligible for promotion after three years of 
service 
18. Advertisement of vacancy 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 2 
19. Principles of selection for promotion to and within the First 
Division 
20. Principles of selection for promotion to and within the Second 
Division 
21. Probation on promotion 
22. Performance appraisal report 
23. Confirmation of appointment 
24. Extension of probation 
25. Incremental date where period of probation extended 
26. Commissioner to keep record 
 
PART III 
SECONDMENT 
27. Secondment 
 
PART IV 
  RESIGNATION, RETIREMENT AND TERMINATION OF 
APPOINTMENT 
28. Resignation 
29. Abandonment 
30. Reasons for termination of appointment 
31. Retirement in the public interest 
32. Termination of appointment on grounds of inefficiency 
33. Medical Board 
34. Unfit officer 
 
PART V 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 3 
POLICE DIVISION, DISTRICT, STATION, ETC. 
35. Police Division, District, etc. 
36. Assignment of officers to District, etc. 
37. Building for use of Police Service 
 
PART VI 
SALARIES, INCREMENTS, ADVANCES, AND 
ALLOWANCES 
Salaries 
38. Allowance for trainee 
39. Salary of officer on first appointment 
40. Salary on promotion 
41. Date of payment of salary 
42. Reversion to substantive office 
43. Deductions from salary 
Increments 
44. Principles of conversion 
45. Additional provision as to conversion 
46. Payment of increment 
47. Increment while acting 
48. Incremental date – general 
49. Incremental date – on probation 
Advances  
50. Application for advance 
51. Payment of advance 
Allowances 
52. Acting allowance 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 4 
53. Grant for funeral expenses 
54. Hardship allowance 
55. Housing allowance 
56. Plain clothes allowance 
57. Proficiency allowance 
58. Temporary separation allowance 
59. Conditions attached to payment of temporary separation 
allowance 
60. Application for temporary separation allowance 
61. Charges for extra duty prescribed 
62. Subsistence and meal allowances 
63. Allowance for travelling abroad on official business 
64. Attorney allowance 
65. Qualifying allowance 
 
 
 
 
PART VII 
HOURS OF WORK, RECORDS OF PERSONNEL AND 
PERFORMANCE APPRAISAL REPORTS 
 
Hours of Work 
66. Work week and working hours 
67. Officer may be required to report for duty at any time 
68. Transfer 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 5 
Records of Personnel 
69. Personal record 
70. Certificate of service to be given 
Performance Appraisal Reports 
71. Performance appraisal reports 
72. Officer to be informed of adverse report 
73. Annual increments 
 
PART VIII 
VACATION LEAVE, SPECIAL LEAVE, AND MEDICAL MATTERS 
 
74. Leave to be granted in accordance with this Part 
Vacation Leave 
75. Eligibility for vacation leave 
76. Vacation leave entitlement 
77. Vacation leave not to be earned while on vacation leave 
78. Vacation leave to be taken annually 
79. Deferment of vacation leave 
80. Casual absences to be deducted from vacation leave 
81. Non-forfeiture of vacation leave earned 
82. Accumulation of vacation leave 
83. Grant of vacation leave 
84. Application for vacation leave 
85. Record of officers on leave 
86. Attending court while on vacation leave 
Special Leave 
87. Duty leave and special leave 
88. Scholarship and study leave 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 6 
89. Sick leave 
90. Extension of sick leave in Trinidad and Tobago 
91. Extension of sick leave outside of Trinidad and Tobago 
92. Medical certificate necessary for sick leave 
93. Medical record of each officer 
94. Entitlement to full pay 
95. Light duty in certain circumstances 
96. Grant of paternity leave 
97. Grant of bereavement leave 
Medical Benefits 
98. Officer entitled to free medical, etc. attention 
 
PART IX 
CUSTODY AND CARE OF PRISONERS 
99. Key for female cell 
100. Opening of cell 
101. Searching of prisoner 
102. Record to be kept of prisoner's property 
103. Prisoner's property handed over 
104. Prisoner in cell to be visited 
105. Children of prisoner in custody 
106. Feeding of prisoner 
107. Legal adviser to prisoner 
108. Sick prisoner 
109. Numerical strength of escort 
110. Prison van 
111. Dangerous prisoner 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 7 
112. Handcuffs 
113. Armed escort 
PART X 
GOVERNMENT BUILDING, FURNITURE, HOSPITAL, ETC 
114. Quarters 
115. Furniture to be kept in good condition 
116. Repair to or replacement of furniture 
117. Notice board 
118. Reception area 
119. Prisoner's cell 
120. Hospital 
 
PART XI 
UNIFORM, EQUIPMENT, ARMS, STORES, ETC. 
121. Uniform and orders of dress 
122. Unauthorised badge or other decoration 
123. Issue of arms and ammunition 
124. Control of arms and ammunition issued 
125. Issue of uniform 
126. Wearing of uniform and plain clothes 
127. Issue of stores 
128. Issue of bedding 
129. Requisition 
130. Stores Ledgers 
 
PART XII – CONDUCT 
131. Duties of an officer 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 8 
132. Absence without leave 
133. Activities outside the Service 
134. Officer not to call or participate in certain public meeting 
135. Participation in demonstration, etc. prohibited 
136. Officer not to publish information 
137. Officer not to allow interview on question of public policy 
138. Officer not to publish comment on national or local matter 
139. Partisanship 
140. Officer not to contribute to, edit or manage newspaper 
141. Rules relating to lecture or presentation 
142. Reprimand of officer 
143. Appearance and turnout 
144. Indebtedness 
145. Bankruptcy 
146. Gift or reward 
147. Exception to gift 
148. Officer not to accept present from subordinate officer 
149. Legal proceedings 
150. Offences 
PART XIII 
DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURE 
151. Disciplinary proceedings 
152. Suspension 
153. Interdiction 
154. Reporting in person 
155. Disciplinary tribunal 
156. Procedure on alleged commission of offence 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 9 
157. Power of disciplinary tribunal 
158. Duty of officers appointed to disciplinary tribunal 
159. Officer on charge not to be permitted leave 
160. Procedure at hearing 
161. Witnesses 
162. Adjournment of hearing 
163. Proceedings in private 
164. Hearing in absence of accused officer 
165. Hearing in absence of prosecutor 
166. Standard of proof 
167. Tribunal to report 
168. Further offence before disciplinary tribunal 
169. Disciplinary tribunal may report to Commissioner 
170. Insufficient evidence before disciplinary tribunal 
171. Informing officer of decision and his right of review 
172. Commissioner may remove officer in public interest 
173. Penalties 
174. Non-payment of remuneration on conviction for a criminal 
offence 
 
PART XIV 
RECOGNITION OF POLICE SERVICE ASSOCIATION 
175. Interpretation of Part XIV 
176. Application for recognition 
177. Publication of application 
178. Objection to application 
179. Examination of records 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 10 
180. Decision of Minister 
181. Public recognition 
182. Special duty leave and time off 
 
PART XV 
GRATUITIES AND PENSIONS 
183. Computation of gratuity, etc., a matter of high priority 
184. Contribution to superannuation allowances 
185. Pension to officer in special cases 
186. Payment out of pensions 
187. Service for less than ten years 
188. Broken service 
189. Permanent injury 
190. Pension to dependan t of officer killed on duty and gratuity to 
widow, etc. of officer who dies in the Service 
 
PART XVI – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
191. Communication to Commissioner 
192. Official communication 
193. Orders 
194. Standing Orders with respect to books and other records 
195. Corrections 
196. Circulation of orders 
197. Pocket diary 
198. Legal aid 
199. Change of name 
200. Saluting 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 11 
201. Register of found property 
202. Establishment of Messes 
203. Administration of Messes 
204. First Division Officers' Mess 
205. Inspectors‘ and Sergeants' Mess 
206. Other Ranks‘ Mess 
207. Sports Club 
208. Police Band 
209. Police Band to play with permission 
210. Application of regulations 
 
APPENDIX A 
APPENDIX B 
APPENDIX C 
APPENDIX D 
APPENDIX E 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 12 
THE POLICE SERVICE REGULATIONS, 2007 
made under sec. 78 
 
  
Citation 
and 
commence
ment 
 1. (1) These regulations may be cited as the Police 
Service Regulations, 2007. 
   (2) These regulations shall come into operation on 
such date as the Minister may appoint by Order. 
  
Interpretati
on  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. In these regulations – 
"acting appointment" means the temporary 
appointment of an officer to act in a higher office, 
whether that office is vacant or not; 
"appointment" means the appointment of a person to 
an office; 
―cohabitant‖ means – 
(a) in relation to a man, a woman  who has 
been living with or who has lived together 
with him in a bona fide  domestic 
relationship for a period of not less than 
five years immediately preceding the date 
of his death; 
(b) in relation to a woman, a man who has 
been living with or who has li ved together 
with her in a bona fide  domestic 
relationship for a period of not less than 
five years immediately preceding the date 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Act No. 38 
of 1991 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Act No.  of 
2007 
of her death, 
  but  only  one  such  relationship shall be taken 
into  account for the purpose of these regulations;  
―cohabitational relationship‖ means the relationship 
between cohabitants, who not being married to 
each other, have lived together in a bona fide 
domestic relationship for a period of not less than 
five years immediately preceding the death of 
either cohabitant; 
"Commission" means the Police Service Commission 
established under section 122(1) of the 
Constitution; 
"Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Police; 
―dangerous drugs‖ has the meaning assigned to it by 
section 3 of the Dangerous Drugs Act, 1991; 
 ―disciplinary tribunal‖ means a disciplinary tribunal 
appointed by the Commissioner under regulation 
155; 
"family" means an officer's spouse and children, 
including adopted children, his mother, father, 
brothers and sisters who are living with and are 
solely dependent on him; 
―forensic DNA analysis‖ has the same meaning 
assigned to it under section 4 of the 
Deoxyribonucleic Acid (DNA) (Forensic) Act, 
2007; 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 14 
 
 
 
 
"Medical Board" means a board for the medical 
examination of an officer, which is appointed by 
the Commissioner of Police; 
"Minister" means the Minister to whom responsibility 
for national security is assigned; 
―non-intimate sample‖ has the same meaning 
assigned to it under section 4 of the 
Deoxyribonucleic Acid (DNA) (Forensic) Act, 
2007; 
 "officer" means a po lice officer, other than the 
Commissioner of Police or a Deputy 
Commissioner of Police; 
"officer in the First Division" means a police officer 
who holds an office specified in the First 
Schedule of the Act; 
"officer in the Second Division" means a police o fficer 
who holds an office specified in the Second 
Schedule of the Act; 
―pensionable emoluments‖, in respect of service in the 
Service means pay and personal allowance; 
"Police Division" or "Division" means a Division 
determined by the Minister under regul ation 
35(1); 
"prescribed form" or "appropriate form" means such 
form as may be prescribed by the Commissioner; 
―Service‖ means the Police Service established under 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 15 
section 4(1) of the Act; 
 ―spouse‖ includes a cohabitant; 
"trainee" means a person who is un dergoing training 
with a view to becoming an officer; 
"transfer" means the movement of an officer from a 
Division or Branch to another Division or Branch 
or from a Police Station to another. 
  
 PART  I -  RECRUITMENT AND APPOINTMENT 
  
Qualificatio
n for 
appointme
nt as 
trainee 
 3.(1) A candidate for appointment as a trainee shall, 
subject to regulation 4, – 
(a) be a citizen of Trinidad and Tobago; 
(b) be required to pass a medical examination 
conducted by a Government Medical 
Officer nominated for the purpose; 
(c) be required to undergo a polygraph test, 
psychological test and be tested for 
dangerous drugs at the cost of the 
Service; 
(d) be of good character as evidenced by a 
police certificate of character; 
(e) be not less than eighteen years and not 
more than thirty -five years of age on the 
1st January of the year in which the 
appointment is made; 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 16 
(f) in the case of- 
(i) a male, be of good physique and at 
least one hundred and sixty -seven 
centimetres in height; or 
(ii) a female, be of good physique and 
at leas t one hundred and fifty 
centimetres in height; 
(g) possess passes in five subjects in the 
CXC Examinations, including English 
Language, at General Proficiency at 
Grade I, II, or III or at Basic Proficiency at 
Grade I in all five subjects, or five G.C.E. 
O‘ Level passes, including English, at 
Grade A, B or C in all five subjects, or 
produce proof of having reached an 
equivalent or higher standard of 
education;  
(h) possess a Trinidad and Tobago driver‘s 
permit with a class 3 endorsement to drive 
light motor vehicles; 
(i) be required to pass a physical 
examination and an agility test; and 
(j) be required to pass a written examination. 
    (2) A candidate who fulfils the requirements of sub -
regulation (1) may be enrolled as a trainee and shall be 
required, if so enrolled, to submit a non -intimate sample for 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 17 
forensic DNA analysis and to undergo a course of training 
at the Police Academy. 
  
Recruitmen
t procedure 
for trainee 
Appendix A 
 
 
 4. (1) A person seeking to be a trainee shall complete 
an application in the form set out in Appendix A and submit 
it to the officer in charge of the Police Station nearest to 
which the applicant resides. 
 (2) Application forms for recruitment shall be made 
available at every Police Station. 
 (3) An application made under this P art shall be 
valid for one year. 
 (4) The officer in charge of the Police Station shall 
ensure that –  
(a) each applicant is fingerprinted and traced;  
(b) the necessary inquiries are made to 
determine the correctness of the 
particulars of the application and the 
suitability of each applicant; and 
(c) a report of the inquiries is prepared. 
 (5) The officer in charge of the Police Station shall 
submit the application form together with a report of the 
inquiry as required under sub -regulation (4) to the offic er or 
person in charge of the Police Academy, who shall be the 
Recruiting Officer.  
  (6) The Recruiting Officer shall review all the 
applications and select those applicants who have met the 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 18 
requirements under regulation 3(1), except the 
requirements under sub-regulation (1)(c). 
 (7) The applicants who are selected under sub -
regulation (6) shall be interviewed by a panel appointed by 
the Commissioner. 
(8)The panel under sub -regulation (7) shall comprise 
of the following five members: 
(a) the Recruiting Officer, who shall be the 
Chairman; 
(b) a person appointed by the Commissioner 
from the Police Academy; 
(c) a police social worker; 
(d) the Director Human Resource of the Police 
Service; and 
(e) a representative from the recognised Police 
Service Association.‖. 
 
  (9) The applica nts who are assessed to be most 
suitable by the panel shall undergo a polygraph test, a 
psychological test and be tested for dangerous drugs at the 
cost of the Service. 
  
Qualificatio
n for 
appointme
nt as Band 
Apprentice 
 5. A candidate for appointment as  a Band 
Apprentice shall, subject to regulation 6, –  
(a) be a citizen of Trinidad and Tobago; 
(b) be of good character as evidenced by a 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 19 
police certificate of character; 
(c) be not less than sixteen years and not 
more than thirty years of  age on the 1 st 
January of t he year in which the 
appointment is made; 
(d) possess a School Leaving Certificate or 
produce proof of having reached an 
equivalent or higher standard of education 
or be required to pass an educational test 
to be set by the Commissioner; and 
(e) be required to pass a medical examination 
conducted by a Government Medical 
Officer nominated for the purpose. 
  
Recruitmen
t procedure 
for Band 
Apprentice 
Appendix A 
 6.(1) A person seeking to be a Band Apprentice shall 
complete an application in the form set out in A ppendix A 
with such modifications as are applicable and submit it to 
the Director of the Police Band. 
  (2) Application forms for recruitment as a Band 
Apprentice shall be made available at every Police Station. 
 (3) An application made under this Part sh all be 
valid for one year. 
 (4) An applicant who fulfils the requirements of 
regulation 5 shall be required to pass a musical test 
conducted by the Director of the Police Band. 
 (5) The officer in charge of the Police Station 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 20 
nearest to which the applicant  resides shall, upon notice by 
the Director of the Police Band, ensure that – 
(a) each applicant is fingerprinted and traced;  
(b) the necessary inquiries are made within a 
reasonable time to ensure the correctness 
of the particulars of the application and  
the suitability of each applicant; and 
(c)  a report of the inquiries is prepared. 
 (6) The officer in charge of the Police Station shall 
submit the report of the inquiry as required under sub -
regulation (5)(b) to the officer or person in charge of the 
Police Academy. 
  (7) The officer or person in charge of the Police 
Academy shall review all the applications, and select those 
applicants he considers most suitable.  
 (8) The applicants who are selected shall be 
interviewed by a panel appointed by the Com missioner of 
which Director of the Police Band shall be a member. 
  (9) An applicant who is assessed as suitable at the 
interview by the panel shall undergo a polygraph test, a 
psychological test and be tested for dangerous drugs  at the 
cost of the Service. 
  
Appointme
nt  and 
discharge 
of Band 
Apprentice 
 7. (1) A candidate who fulfils the requirements of 
regulations 5 and 6 may be enrolled as a Band Apprentice. 
(2) The Commissioner shall determine the course 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and period of training for a Band A pprentice and his 
appointment as a Bandsman after consultation with the 
Director of the Police Band based upon an assessment of 
the conduct, discipline, musical ability and application of 
such Band Apprentice. 
 (3) No Band Apprentice shall be appointed a 
Bandsman before he has attained the age of eighteen 
years.  
 (4) A Band Apprentice who fails to satisfy the 
requirements of the course of training, or is otherwise not 
considered fit to be a member of the Service, may be 
discharged summarily by the Commissioner. 
  
Service 
number 
and name 
tag 
 8.(1) An officer on first appointment shall be given a 
service number, which he shall retain throughout his 
service, and when such an officer leaves the Service the 
service number issued to him shall not be re-issued. 
 (2) An officer on first appointment shall be issued a 
name tag. 
 (3) An officer below the rank of Inspector shall wear 
his service number and name tag on such part of his 
uniform as may be designated by the Commissioner. 
 (4) An officer of the rank of or above Inspector shall 
wear his name tag and badge of rank on such part of his 
uniform as may be designated by the Commissioner. 
  



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 22 
Appointme
nt to the 
First 
Division 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.(1) A candidate for appointment to the First Division 
may be selected from among – 
 (a) officers in the Second Division; 
(b) persons outside of the Police Service. 
 (2) An officer in the Second Division who is suitable 
for appointment on the grounds of— 
 (a) experience, skills and merit; or 
(b) having obtained a Bachelor Degree or 
produce proof of having reached an 
equivalent or higher standard of education 
from an institution recognised by the 
Accreditation Council of Trinidad and 
Tobago, 
is eligible for appointment to the First Division.‖. 
 (3) A person who is appointed under sub-regulation 
(1) is required to undergo an appropriate course of training 
in police duties, but the Commissioner may exempt from 
such training a person appointed under sub -regulation 
(1)(a).‖. 
 (4) A candidate referred to in sub -regulation (1)(b) 
shall possess the qualification specified in regulation 3(1), 
other than those specified in sub -regulation (g) and (j), and 
a Bachelor‘s Degree, or  produce proof of having reached 
an equivalent or higher standard of education, from an 
institution recognised  by the Accredited Council of Trinidad 
and Tobago.‖. 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 23 
  
Date of 
appointme
nt 
 10.(1)  An officer‘s date of appointment shall normally 
be the date on which he assumes the duties of the office to 
which he has been appointed. 
  (2)  If an officer is select ed for appointment from 
outside Trinidad and Tobago, the date of appointment shall 
be the date specified in the letter of appointment. 
  
  
  
 PART II – PROBATION AND PROMOTION 
  
Probation  
of 
constable 
 11. The probationary period of a constable on f irst 
appointment shall be a period of two years.  
  
Principles 
applicable 
to 
constable 
on 
probation 
 12. The following principles shall be observed in 
respect of a constable during his probationary period: 
(a) the constable shall be given every 
opportunity to learn his work and be 
tested as to his ability to perform it; 
(b) he shall be accorded all possible facilities 
for acquiring experience in his duties; and 
(c) he shall be subject to sympathetic 
supervision so far as the exigencies of the 
Service perm it and be assigned to duty 
where such supervision is possible. 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 24 
  
Probationar
y 
assessmen
t of 
constable 
on first 
appointme
nt 
 
Appendix B 
 
 
 13. In the case of a constable on probation, the 
senior officer exercising control over that constable shall 
furnish to the Commissioner two assessments in 
accordance with the form set out in Appendix B: 
(a) a first assessment after the constable has 
completed one year of service, not later 
than one month after the twelfth month; 
and 
(b) a final assessment not earlier t han six 
weeks nor later than two weeks before the 
period of probation expires.  
  
Dismissal 
of 
constable 
on 
probation 
 14.(1) A constable who is on probation may, at 
any time during the period of probation, be dismissed by the 
Commissioner in accordance with the procedure prescribed 
in this regulation. 
  (2) When the Commissioner decides to dismiss a 
constable under sub-regulation (1), the Commissioner shall, 
prior to the decision, give a written notice to the constable 
specifying the reason and any relevant facts in detail for the 
contemplated decision, and request the constable to 
respond in writing within fourteen days of the date of the 
notice why he ought not to be dismissed. 
  (3) When the constable responds in writing, the 
Commissioner shall consi der the response and may 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 25 
conduct a hearing before making his decision and the 
hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the 
procedure set out in regulations 160(2) to 166. 
  (4) When the constable fails to respond in writing, 
the Commissioner shall make his decision and immediately 
in writing inform the constable of the decision. 
  
Examinatio
n Board 
 15.(1) All examinations in relation to the Second 
Division shall be set and the papers marked by such 
Examination Board as may be appointed for that pur pose 
by the Commissioner. 
 (2) The Commissioner shall be responsible for the 
conduct of examinations set under sub-regulation (1).  
  
Qualifying 
examinatio
n 
 16. (1) An officer of the rank of Constable through 
to Sergeant may apply on the prescribed form  to the 
Commissioner to be allowed to take the qualifying 
examination for promotion to the next rank. 
 (2) An officer who is successful in the qualifying 
examination may be considered for promotion in 
accordance with regulation 20.  
  
Constables 
are eligible 
for 
promotion 
after three 
years of 
service  
 17. A constable shall not be considered for 
promotion unless he has three years in the Service. 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 26 
Advertisem
ent of 
vacancy 
 18. Where the Commissioner considers that there is 
no suitable candidate already in  the Service available for 
the filling of any vacancy having regard to qualifications, 
experience and merit and that it would be advantageous 
and in the best interest of the Service that the services of a 
person not already in the Service be secured, the 
Commissioner shall advertise such vacancy. 
  
Principles 
of selection 
for 
promotion 
to and 
within the 
First 
Division 
 19.(1) The Commissioner shall publish a 
Departmental Order specifying the points system to be 
followed by a supervising officer in the pre paration of a 
performance appraisal report. 
  (2) The points awarded to a police officer based on 
his performance appraisal report shall represent twenty -five 
percent and the results of the promotional assessment 
process shall represent seventy -five perce nt of his final 
grade as stated in the Order of Merit List mentioned in sub -
regulation (9). 
  (3) A police officer shall not be considered for 
promotion to and within the First Division unless he has 
attained sixty or more points on his performance apprai sal 
report. 
  (4) The promotional assessment process shall be 
conducted by the person contracted, who shall appoint 
such number of panels, comprising not less than three 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 27 
persons each, as the person considers necessary and the 
members of each panel shall p ossess appropriate skills, 
expertise and qualification in policing and particularly to the 
rank under consideration. 
  (5) The promotional assessment process shall 
comprise of two stages as follows: 
 (a) stage one shall require every qualifying 
officer to wr ite a qualifying examination, 
from which only the top performing 
candidates as determined by the person 
shall proceed to stage two; and  
(b) stage two shall be a suitability 
assessment process. 
  (6) To assess the competencies of an officer 
relevant to the po sition for which he is being considered, 
the suitability assessment process may include, inter alia,  
role play, exercises dealing with hypothetical situations, and 
other appropriate methods of assessment that are 
consistent with contemporary professional s tandards and 
needs of policing. 
  (7) The person shall establish the competencies 
before conducting the suitability assessment process and 
such competencies shall be given in writing to each 
qualifying candidate at least one week before the suitability 
assessment process is conducted. 
  (8) The competencies, which may comprise core or 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 28 
technical competencies, may include matters such as 
leadership, communication, initiative, decision making, 
problem solving, customer relations, integrity, and 
organisational awareness. 
  (9) Subject to sub -regulation (2), every officer 
considered for promotion shall be rated according to the 
results of the promotional assessment process specified in 
this regulation together with the points awarded to him 
based on his perfor mance appraisal report and be placed 
on an Order of Merit List. 
  (10) The person shall, as soon as the promotional 
assessment process is completed, submit the Order of 
Merit List to the Commissioner, who shall immediately 
cause it to be published in a Departmental Order.  
  (11) Subject to sub-regulation (12), an Order of Merit 
List shall be valid for a period of twelve months from the 
date of its publication under sub-regulation (6). 
  (12) The Commissioner may extend the validity of 
the Order of Merit  List before its expiration for a period not 
exceeding one year. 
 (13) An officer who is not promoted during the twelve 
month period or such other period as ordered by the 
Commissioner under sub -regulation (12) is required, to 
repeat the promotional assessment process. 
(14) Where the officer mentioned in sub -regulation 
(13) successfully completes the promotional assessment 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 29 
process for three consecutive times and is not promoted, he 
shall be paid a qualifying allowance as from the date of the 
third occasion on which his name is placed on the Order of 
Merit List, and regulation 65(3), (4) and (5) shall apply to 
him as it applies to an officer under regulation 65.‖. 
  
Principles 
of selection 
for 
promotion 
to and 
within the 
Second 
Division 
 20.(1) Subject to sub -regulation (2), the 
Promotion Advisory Board shall interview-  
(a) an officer who has passed the qualifying 
examination for promotion and is 
recommended for promotion by the officer 
in charge of his Division or Branch;  
(b) an officer who was allocated fifty or more 
points at the previous interview; and 
(c) an officer who is eligible under sub -
regulation (3). 
 (2) An officer shall not be interviewed by the Board 
unless he has been allocated forty or more points by the 
Board based on the criteria, other than the i nterview, listed 
in sub-regulation (5).   
 (3) Subject to sub -regulation (2), an officer who is 
allocated less than sixty points is eligible to be interviewed 
at the next sitting of the Board. 
  (4) Every officer considered for promotion shall be 
rated according to the criteria specified in sub-regulation (5) 
and each officer who is allocated sixty or more points shall 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 30 
be placed on an Order of Merit List. 
  (5) The criteria mentioned in sub -regulation (4) 
shall be as follows:  
  Maximum Points 
Performance appraisal 
Interview 
Examination mark  
40 
35 
35 
 (6)    The Board shall submit the Order of Merit List to 
the Commissioner, who shall cause it to be published in a 
Departmental Order.  
Probation  
on 
promotion 
  21.(1) An officer who is promoted to an of fice 
shall serve a probationary period of twelve months in the 
office to which he is promoted. 
 (2) Where an officer is promoted to an office in 
which he has performed the duties, whether in an acting or 
temporary capacity, for a period of equal or longer duration 
than the prescribed period of probation, immediately 
preceding the promotion, the officer shall not be required to 
serve the probationary period. 
 (3) Where an officer is promoted to an office in 
which immediately preceding the promotion he has ac ted 
for a period less than twelve months, the period of acting 
service shall be offset against the prescribed period of 
probation. 
 (4) Where an officer is promoted before he has 
completed the period of probation in his former office, the 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 31 
unserved portion of that period of probation shall be waived 
and the officer is deemed to have been confirmed in that 
appointment. 
  
Performanc
e appraisal 
report 
 22. In the case of an officer serving a twelve month 
period of probation, the senior officer in charge of th at 
officer shall furnish to the Commissioner a performance 
appraisal report one month before the period of probation 
expires. 
  
Confirmatio
n of 
appointme
nt 
 23. If, after consideration of the final report of the 
senior officer, the Commissioner is satisf ied that the 
officer‘s probationary service has been satisfactory, he shall 
be confirmed in his appointment with effect from the date of 
appointment.  
  
Extension 
of 
probation 
 24. If the Commissioner is not satisfied that the 
officer‘s probationary serv ice has been satisfactory, the 
period of probation may be extended for one further period 
of six months. 
  
Incremental 
date where 
period of 
probation 
extended 
 25. Where an officer‘s period of probation has been 
extended and he is subsequently confirmed in his 
appointment, the Commissioner may direct that the officer‘s 
increment be paid-  
 (a) with effect from the date following that on 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 32 
which the extended period of probation 
expired without change in the incremental 
date; or  
 (b) with effect from the d ate following that on 
which the extended period of probation 
expired, that date would then become his 
incremental date. 
  
Commissio
ner to keep 
record 
 26. The Commissioner shall keep a record of every 
officer who has been appointed on probation. 
  
 PART III – SECONDMENT 
  
Secondme
nt 
 27.(1) An officer who is seconded to an office in 
the Public Service shall be paid the salary applicable to that 
office and is eligible for any increments payable to the 
holder of that office.  
  (2) The remuneration of an officer on secondment 
to an office out of the Service shall be paid by the receiving 
Ministry, public body or authority. 
  (3) During the period of secondment of an officer 
out of the Service, the officer shall continue to hold his 
substantive office i n the Service and, notwithstanding his 
absence from the Service, is eligible for promotion.  
  (4) The period of service of an officer while on 
secondment shall be taken into account when calculating 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 33 
his pension where the secondment is to an office in another 
service of the Government or where the receiving public 
body or authority makes the appropriate arrangement for 
the preservation of the officer‘s pensionable service. 
  (5) An officer on secondment to an office in the 
Service is eligible for the leav e applicable to that office and 
while on such leave he is entitled to be paid the salary 
payable to the holder of that office. 
  (6) An officer who has completed a period of 
secondment outside of the Service and who returns to the 
Service shall revert to the point in the salary scale in 
respect of his substantive office which he would have 
reached if he had not been seconded. 
  (7) A period of secondment shall not exceed two 
years. 
  
 PART IV 
RESIGNATION, RETIREMENT AND TERMINATION OF 
APPOINTMENT 
  
Resignatio
n 
 28.(1)  An officer who intends to resign shall send by 
registered mail or deliver a written notice of his intention to 
resign to the office of the Commissioner at least one month 
before the date on which he wishes to relinquish his 
appointment, but the Commissioner may waive the 
requirement of notice in whole or in part if he thinks fit.  
  (2)  Notwithstanding regulation 82, an officer who fails 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 34 
without reasonable cause to comply with sub -regulation (1) 
may forfeit all leave and the benefits and privileges accruing 
to him in respect of leave.  
  (3) An officer is not entitled, except with the 
permission of the Commissioner, to withdraw his notice of 
resignation.  
  
Abandonm
ent 
 29.(1)  An officer who is absent from duty without 
leave for seven consecutive days, during which time he has 
failed to notify his senior officer of the cause of his absence, 
may be declared by the Commissioner to have abandoned 
his office, whether he holds a permanent, temporary, or 
contractual appointment, and thereupon the office becomes 
vacant and the officer ceases to be an officer. 
 (2) When an officer abandons his office under sub -
regulation (1), regulation 28(2) shall apply to him and he 
shall be considered to be discreditably discharged. 
  
Reasons 
for 
termination 
of 
appointme
nt 
 30.  Subject to regulations 28, 29, 31, 32 and 33(2), 
the services of an officer may be terminated for the 
following reasons- 
 (a) where he holds a permanent 
appointment— 
   (i) on dismissal in consequence of 
disciplinary proceedings; 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 35 
 (ii) on the abolition of office; 
 (b) where he holds a temporary appointment- 
 (i) on the expiry or other termination of 
an appointment for a specified 
period; 
 (ii) where the office itself is of a 
temporary nature and is no longer 
necessary; 
 (iii) on the termination of appointment in 
the case of an officer on probation; 
 (iv) on the termination of appointment in 
the case of an officer holding a non -
pensionable office with no service in 
a pensionable office;  
 (v) on dismissal or removal in 
consequence of disciplinary 
proceedings;  
 (c) where he is on contract, his services shall 
be terminated in accordance with the 
terms of the contract.  
 (d) whether he holds a permanent, temporary 
or contractual appointment, where he is 
convicted for a crimina l offence which 
carries a penalty of six or more months of 
imprisonment. 
  



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 36 
  
Retirement 
in the 
public 
interest 
 31. (1) Where it is represented to the Commissioner 
that it is in the public interest that an officer should be 
required to retire from the Service on grounds which cannot 
suitably be dealt with under any of these regulations, the 
Commissioner shall call for a report on the officer from his 
supervising officer and shall take into account the officer‘s 
record during the preceding five years or, where the officer 
has less than five years service, his record during his period 
of service. 
  (2) If after considering the report and record 
mentioned in sub -regulation (1) and giving the officer an 
opportunity of submitting a reply, the Commissioner is 
satisfied that it is in the public interest to retire the officer, 
the officer shall be required to retire on such date as the 
Commissioner shall determine, and he shall be retired 
accordingly. 
  (3) Where an officer is examined by a Medical 
Board on two or more occasions and is found fit for service 
but continues to be absent from duty on the ground of ill -
health for a cumulative period of six months during a single 
twelve month period, he shall be considered for retirement 
in the public interest, subject  to a comprehensive review of 
his performance by the Commissioner and after giving the 
officer an opportunity to be heard. 
  



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 37 
Terminatio
n of 
appointme
nt on 
ground of 
inefficiency 
 32. (1) The Commissioner may terminate the 
appointment of an officer on gro unds of reported 
inefficiency and having regard to officer‘s job performance 
and, where applicable, his performance appraisal reports. 
  (2) Where the senior officer in charge of an officer 
makes a recommendation in writing to the Commissioner 
that the ap pointment of the officer should be terminated on 
grounds of inefficiency, the officer shall be informed in 
writing by the senior officer of such recommendation and be 
given an opportunity to make representation thereon to the 
Commissioner. 
  (3) Where the  officer makes representation under 
sub-regulation (2), the representation shall be forwarded in 
its original form to the Commissioner.  
  (4) The Commissioner may, upon receipt of the 
recommendation under sub - regulation (2), cause an 
investigation to be made before making a final decision. 
  
Medical 
Board 
 
 
 
 
 
33.(1)  A Medical Board shall be appointed whenever 
it is necessary for an officer to be examined with a view to 
ascertaining whether he should be retired on grounds of ill 
health.  
  (2)  An officer may be required by the Commissioner 
to undergo a medical examination by a Medical Board at 
any time.  
  (3)   An officer who is required to undergo a medical 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 38 
examination shall submit himself to be examined by a 
Medical Board at such time and place as the Commissioner 
may direct.  
  (4)  Where a Medical Board is convened in 
accordance with sub-regulation (1), the Commissioner shall 
make available to the Board the medical record of the 
officer, and any further relevant information that would 
assist the Board with its findings. 
  (5)  Where an officer, through refusal or neglect to 
obtain specialist advice or to obtain treatment when so 
recommended by the Medical Board, falls sick and in 
consequence is unable to perform his duties, the 
Commissioner may direct that the period during which he is 
unable to perform his duties shall be counted as leave 
without pay.  
  
Unfit officer  34.(1)  An officer who is medically boarded and found 
unfit for further service shall not be allowed to remain on 
duty, and shall be granted such vacation leave and 
accumulated vacation leave for which he is eligible or two 
months‘ leave, whichever is the greater, as from the date on 
which he is notified of his unfitness for further duty. 
 (2) Upon the expiration of the leave r eferred to in 
sub-regulation (1), the services of the officer shall be 
terminated, with such benefits that may have accrued to 
him. 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 39 
  
 PART V-  POLICE DIVISION, DISTRICT, STATION, ETC. 
  
Police 
Divisions, 
Districts, 
etc. 
 35.(1) For the purpose of the Act and these 
regulations, there shall be such Divisions and Branches as 
may be determined by the Minister. 
   (2) Each Division shall be sub -divided into Police 
Districts and there shall be one or more Police Stations in 
each District as approved by the Minister. 
   (3) The Commissioner shall publish the boundaries 
of Police Divisions and Police Districts in the Gazette.  
  (4) The Commissioner may establish such 
Administrative or Operational Units in the Service as 
approved by the Minister. 
  
Assignmen
t of officers 
to Districts, 
etc. 
 36. The Commissioner may assign any number of 
officers for duty to Divisions, Branches, Stations or other 
Administrative or Operational Units, as he considers 
necessary for the efficient functioning of the Service. 
  
Building for 
use of 
Police 
Service 
 
 37.(1) The Minister may assign, for the use of 
the Service, such buildings as may be provided or made 
available for that purpose, and may make such further 
provision for the accommodation, training and 
hospitalisation of officers as may be necessary.  
 (2) The Minister of Health shall approve a building 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 40 
or other accommodation mentioned in sub-regulation (1). 
  
 PART VI 
SALARIES, INCREMENTS, ADVANCES, AND 
ALLOWANCES 
  
 Salaries 
  
Allowance 
for trainee 
 38. A trainee sh all receive an allowance, to be 
called a trainee allowance, at a rate approved by the 
Minister of Finance. 
  
Salary of 
officer on 
first 
appointme
nt 
 39.  The salary of an officer on first appointment shall 
be computed from the date of his assumption of d uties as 
an officer. 
  
Salary on 
promotion 
 40. On promotion, an officer shall receive the salary 
attached to the office to which he is promoted from the 
effective date of his promotion or from the date he assumes 
the duties of the office as may be speci fied in his letter of 
promotion. 
  
Date of 
payment of 
salary 
 41.(1) Salaries shall be paid to officers on the 
day immediately preceding the last business day of the 
month, but if the last business day falls on a Monday, salary 
shall be paid on the prece ding Friday or the day preceding 
that day if Friday is a public holiday. 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 41 
   (2) Notwithstanding sub-regulation (1), the Minister 
of Finance may vary the date on which salaries shall be 
paid in any month. 
    (3) An officer who is proceeding on vacation le ave 
on a date prior to the normal date on which salaries are to 
be paid for that month, and who will be on leave on the 
appointed pay day, may be paid his salary for that particular 
month in advance of the normal pay day, if arrangements 
cannot otherwise c onveniently be made for payment of his 
salary in accordance with sub-regulation (1) or (2). 
   (4) Sub-regulation (3) shall apply only in respect of 
the first month of the officer's vacation leave. 
  
Reversion 
to 
substantive 
office 
 42. When an officer r everts to his substantive office 
on the termination of his acting appointment he shall be 
paid the salary in his substantive office, which he would 
have received, had he not been given an acting 
appointment in a higher office. 
  
Deductions 
from salary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 43.(1) No money shall be deducted from an 
officer's salary without prior notice in writing to him of not 
less than one month. 
   (2) The Minister of Finance shall determine the type 
of deduction which may be permitted to be accommodated 
on the paysheet as an approved deduction. 
   (3) Notwithstanding sub -regulation (1), the 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 42 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Commissioner may - 
(a) deduct from the salary of an officer all 
fines and penalties imposed as a result of 
disciplinary action taken in accordance 
with these regulations; 
(b) deduct from the salary of an officer all 
overpayments of salary in accordance 
with any written law and may make such 
other deductions as are approved by the 
Minister of Finance towards the reduction 
or repayment of outstanding debts due to 
the State. 
  
 Increments 
  
Principles 
of 
conversion 
 44.(1) Where an officer is promoted his salary 
shall be adjusted as follows: 
(a) where the salary which the officer was 
receiving in the lower office immediately 
prior to promotion was less than the 
minimum salary o f the higher office, then 
the officer shall on promotion be paid the 
minimum salary of the higher office; but if 
the additional amount due to the officer is 
less than the value of one increment in the 
salary range of the lower office, he shall 
move up to t he next higher point in the 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 43 
salary range; 
(b) where the salary which the officer was 
receiving in the lower office immediately 
prior to promotion was the same as the 
minimum salary of the higher office, then 
the officer's salary on promotion shall be 
adjusted to the next incremental point in 
the salary range of the higher office; 
(c) where the salary which the officer was 
receiving in the lower office immediately 
prior to promotion was more than the 
minimum salary of the higher office, then 
the officer's sa lary on promotion shall first 
be adjusted to the incremental point in the 
higher salary range immediately above his 
salary and then be further adjusted to the 
next incremental point in the higher salary 
range. 
    (2) After conversion in accordance with s ub-
regulation (1), the officer's salary shall be further adjusted to 
the next point in the salary range of the office to which he 
has been promoted on the date on which his next increment 
would have become due to him in the post from which he 
was promoted, and subsequent increments shall accrue to 
him on the anniversary of that date. 
  (3) When an officer is promoted on the date on 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 44 
which he was due an increment in the office from which he 
was promoted he shall first be granted an increment on that 
date and then his salary shall be adjusted in accordance 
with sub-regulation (1), and in such a case the officer shall 
retain the date of his promotion as his incremental date. 
Additional 
provision 
as to 
conversion 
 
 
 
 45. Where an officer has been acting in a higher office 
immediately before his appointment to that office or to an 
office in the same salary range as that office, he shall 
convert to the higher salary range in the same manner as is 
provided in regulation 44(1). 
  
Payment of 
increment 
 46.(1) Subject to sub -regulation (2), where an 
officer holds an office that has a salary range, increments 
shall be paid to such officer, on the completion of each year 
of satisfactory service until he has reached the maximum of 
the salary range, and the increments pai d shall be in the 
amounts prescribed for the particular office. 
   (2) Increments shall be earned, and a year of 
service shall be taken to be satisfactory only if the 
Commissioner has satisfied himself and has certified on the 
prescribed form that the offi cer has during such year 
performed his duties with efficiency and diligence and that 
his conduct during the period has been satisfactory.  
   (3) In determining whether the service of an officer 
during a year has been satisfactory, the Commissioner may 
not take into account a specific act of delinquency if the 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 45 
officer qualified for an increment in other respects. 
   (4) The Commissioner shall sign the increment 
certificate on the prescribed form, effective from the date 
when the officer's increment becomes due, and shall attach 
the said certificate to the paysheet for the month in which 
the increment accrues. 
  
Increment 
while 
acting 
 47.(1) Subject to this regulation, an officer who is 
appointed to act in a higher office shall be paid increments 
in that h igher office and shall continue to draw increments 
in his substantive office. 
(2) Where an officer – 
(a) was not earning increments in his 
substantive office, and the office in which 
he is acting has a salary range, he shall 
receive an increment in the higher salary 
range on the anniversary date of his 
acting appointment; 
(b) has reached the maximum salary of his 
substantive office, which maximum may 
be equal to or greater than the minimum 
but less than the maximum of the higher 
office, he shall receive an increment in the 
higher salary range as stated in paragraph 
(a). 
 (3) The grant of an increment under sub -regulation 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 46 
(2)(a) or (b) shall be subject to the - 
(a) officer acting continuously for a period of 
twelve months in the higher office; and 
(b) issue of an  increment certificate certifying 
satisfactory service on the prescribed form 
by the Commissioner. 
  (4) The period of continuous acting mentioned in 
sub-regulation (3) shall not be considered to have been 
broken if the officer is granted normal sick leav e, paternity 
or maternity leave during the acting appointment. 
 (5) Where an officer has been acting in a higher 
office for more than twelve months and, in accordance with 
sub-regulation (2), is in receipt of increments in such office, 
he shall continue to  receive such increments after a break 
in the acting appointment, but only if - 
(a) he resumed acting in the same higher office or 
in a higher office in the same salary range within 
six months of the break; or 
(b) the break was caused by his proceeding on 
leave of any type for a period not exceeding one 
year and he resumes duty in the higher office 
within six months of his resumption of duty. 
  
Incremental 
date - 
general 
 48.(1) An officer who is transferred from one 
office to another office that has the same sal ary range shall 
retain the incremental date of the office from which he was 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 47 
transferred. 
   (2) Where an officer has been acting in an office 
immediately before his appointment to it, his incremental 
date shall be the anniversary date of his acting 
appointment, if it is more advantageous to him, instead of 
the date on which his next increment would have become 
due in the post from which he was promoted.  
  
Incremental 
date – on 
probation 
 49.(1) Subject to this regulation, an officer 
appointed or promoted on probation to an office shall not be 
granted an increment until he has been confirmed. 
 (2) Upon confirmation, an officer's incremental date 
shall be the anniversary of the date of appointment or in the 
case of promotion, in accordance with regulation 44(2).     
  
 Advances 
  
Application  
for advance 
 50. An application for an advance under regulation 
49 shall be made to the Comptroller of Accounts.   
  
Payment of 
advance 
 51.(1) An advance not exceeding one month's 
salary may be paid to an officer  proceeding on vacation 
leave of not less than fourteen days to be spent either out 
of Trinidad and Tobago or in Trinidad and Tobago but away 
from his ordinary place of residence. 
 (2) An advance paid under sub -regulation (1) shall 
be paid to the officer e ither in Trinidad and Tobago before 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 48 
he proceeds on leave or at his request while he is abroad 
on leave. 
   (3) An advance not exceeding one month's salary 
may be made to an officer through a Trinidad and Tobago 
Overseas Mission in case of an emergency, eac h case 
being dealt with on its merit. 
   (4) Interest is payable on any advance made under 
this regulation, at such rates as the Minister of Finance may 
determine.  
    (5) An advance paid under this regulation, together 
with interest thereon, shall be re paid in not more than 
twelve monthly instalments or over such longer period of 
time as may be fixed by the Minister of Finance, the first 
instalment falling due at the end of the month following that 
in which the officer resumes duty.  
   (6) The Minister of Finance may authorise an 
advance for any purpose other than those specified in this 
regulation, under terms and conditions to be fixed by him. 
  
 Allowances 
  
Acting 
allowance 
 52.(1) An officer appointed to act in an office in a 
salary range that is higher than that of his substantive office 
shall, with effect from the date of the commencement of his 
acting appointment, if the actual salary he is drawing in his 
substantive office is less than the minimum salary of the 
office in which he is appointed  to act, receive the minimum 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 49 
salary of the higher office. 
    (2) An additional payment made under this 
regulation to an officer appointed to act in a higher office, 
that is over and above what he should have drawn in his 
substantive office, is deemed to be an acting allowance 
payable to him.  
  
Grant for 
funeral 
expenses 
 53. A grant shall be made at such sum as may be 
approved by the Minister of Finance to assist in defraying 
the funeral expenses of an officer who dies while in service.  
  
Hardship 
allowance 
 54.(1) An officer who is transferred and as a 
result suffers hardship, whether or not he is separated from 
his family, shall, on application by him, be granted a 
hardship allowance on the same basis as applicable to a 
separated officer but for su ch period of time as the 
Commissioner may direct. 
   (2) An application for a hardship allowance shall be 
submitted monthly on the prescribed form to the 
Commissioner, and, except in special circumstances, no 
claim shall be entertained that is made later t han three 
months after the period to which the claim relates. 
  
Housing 
allowance 
 55.(1) An officer who is not provided with 
appropriate quarters under regulation 114 shall be paid a 
housing allowance at such rates as may be approved by 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 50 
the Minister of Finance. 
   (2) An officer who marries shall report in writing to 
the Commissioner the fact of his marriage within three 
months of his marriage, and the report shall be supported 
by a marriage certificate. 
  (3) Where an officer fails to comply with sub -
regulation (2), the housing allowance shall be payable only 
for the preceding three months from the date of compliance 
with sub-regulation (2). 
    (4) An officer shall not receive a housing allowance 
payable to a married officer and a housing allowance 
payable to an unmarried officer for the same period of time. 
 (5) Where an officer is married to another officer, 
each officer shall be paid the housing allowance payable to 
an unmarried officer.  
 (6) An officer, in receipt of a housing allowance, 
who is - 
(a) widowed; 
(b) divorced; or 
(c)  legally separated, 
 shall report the fact to the Commissioner within one month 
of the occurrence of the event. 
 (7) Subject to sub -regulation (8), an officer 
mentioned in sub -regulation (6) shall be paid the housing 
allowance applicable to a married police officer up to the 
end of the month in which the officer became widowed, 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 51 
divorced or legally separated, and thereafter the officer 
shall be paid the housing allowance applicable to an 
unmarried police officer.  
 (8) The officer mentioned in sub -regulation (7) may 
be allowed to continue to receive the housing allowance 
applicable to a married police officer where there are 
children of the marriage or legally adopted children who are 
dependent on the officer until each child  attains the age of 
eighteen or marries, whichever event occurs first. 
  (9) An officer occupying rent -free quarters is not 
entitled to any housing allowance. 
 (10) For the purpose of sub -regulations (2), (3) and 
(4), marriage includes cohabitation. 
  
Plain 
clothes 
allowance 
 56.(1) An officer required to do duty in plain 
clothes shall be so authorised in writing by the 
Commissioner. 
 (2) An officer required to do duty in plain clothes 
shall be paid a plain clothes allowance at such rates as may 
be approved by the Minister of Finance for such part of a 
month in which he is so required to wear plain clothes, but 
such an allowance shall not be paid to an officer for any 
month in which he is required to wear plain clothes for a 
period of less than seven days. 
  
Proficiency 
allowance 
 57.(1) A proficiency allowance at rates approved 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 52 
by the Minister of Finance may be granted to an officer 
performing specified duties. 
 (2) Subject to sub -regulation (1), an officer who 
goes on sick leave or vacation leave may co ntinue to be 
paid a proficiency allowance but only if the period for which 
he is on vacation leave or sick leave does not exceed 
fourteen days. 
  
  
Temporary 
separation 
allowance 
 58.(1) An officer shall be considered to be 
"separated" from his family i f, as a result of an appointment 
or transfer, he is compelled to take up residence in another 
Division, District, Branch or Section without being able to 
take his family with him, because – 
(a) suitable accommodation cannot be found 
immediately in the new Division, District, 
Branch or Section for his family; 
(b) it would not be reasonable to expect the 
officer to remove his family from his 
present residence; or 
(c) he could not reasonably be expected to 
travel daily from his present residence to 
the new Div ision, District, Branch or 
Section. 
   (2) A separated officer may be paid a temporary 
separation allowance related to the additional expenditure 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 53 
incurred by him in maintaining two households. 
  
Conditions 
attached to 
payment of 
temporary 
separation 
allowance 
 59. The payment of a temporary separation 
allowance shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(a) it shall not exceed the maximum amount 
fixed by the Minister of Finance; 
(b) in the case of an appointment or transfer 
which is known to be permane nt, it shall 
be paid for a period not exceeding three 
months; 
(c) in the case of an appointment or transfer 
which is known to be or turns out to have 
been temporary, it shall be paid for a 
period not exceeding six months; 
(d) extensions of the period of pa yment as 
provided for in paragraph (b) and (c) shall 
be made only on the authority of the Chief 
Personnel Officer, to whom application by 
the officer shall be made promptly with full 
supporting reasons for the grant of an 
extension of time; 
(e) no allowanc e shall be paid where the 
period of separation is less than one 
month; 
(f) the officer claiming the allowance shall be 
required to produce a certified statement, 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 54 
supported by payment receipts where 
possible, showing the additional 
expenditure involved in having to maintain 
two households;  
(g) the allowance granted shall be a sum 
equivalent to the additional expenditure 
incurred, but not exceeding the maximum 
amount fixed by the Minister of Finance; 
(h) an officer shall not receive both temporary 
separation allowance and subsistence 
allowance in respect of the same period. 
  
Application 
for 
temporary 
separation 
allowance 
 60. An application for a temporary separation 
allowance shall be submitted monthly by a separated officer 
on the prescribed form to the Chief Personnel Officer 
through the Commissioner, and, except in special 
circumstances, no application shall be entertained which is 
not made within three months after the period to which the 
claims relates. 
  
Charges for 
extra duty 
prescribed 
 
 61.(1) Subject to sub -regulation (2), the 
Commissioner may, at the written request of an organiser of 
such entertainment, bazaars, private assemblies or other 
occasions or functions as are approved by the 
Commissioner, provide for the services of officers for the 
purpose of preserving order at such entertainment, 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 55 
bazaars, private assemblies, other occasions or functions, 
and for performing such extra duties as the Commissioner 
may determine, on the payment of such rates as the 
Minister of Finance may prescribe.  
    (2) An officer shall not be deputed for extra duty 
under sub -regulation (1) unless he voluntarily undertakes 
such extra duty. 
   (3) An officer may only perform extra duty under 
sub-regulation (1) outside his official duty hours. 
   (4) Where an officer is deputed for extra duty under 
sub-regulation (1) he shall be paid for his service at the rate 
of ninety per cent of the charges levied under sub -
regulation (1) and the remaining ten per cent shall be paid 
into the Award Fund. 
   (5) Nothing in this regulation shall apply in the case 
of a private or public Government function, except that in 
the case of a private Government function, the 
Commissioner may levy charges in accordance with sub -
regulation (1) and make payments in accordance with sub -
regulation (4). 
   (6) An officer who volunteers and is deputed for 
extra duty under sub -regulation (1) shall report for duty as 
required. 
  
Subsistenc
e and meal 
allowances 
 62. An officer shall be paid subsistence and meal 
allowances at a rate approved by the Minister of Finance. 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 56 
  
Allowance 
for 
travelling 
abroad on 
official 
business 
 63. An officer who is required to travel abroad on 
official business is entitled to such allowance as may be 
approved by the Minister of Finance. 
  
Attorney 
allowance 
 64. Notwithstanding his rank in the Police Service, 
an officer who is an attorney -at-law and who is assigned to 
the legal department of the Service or who is not so 
assigned but is required to perform duties as an attorney-at-
law shall be paid an allowance, to be ca lled an attorney 
allowance, at a rate approved by the Minister of Finance. 
  
  
Qualifying 
allowance 
 65. (1)  Where an officer above the rank of constable 
is not promoted within three years after being interviewed 
by the Board for promotion, he shall, s ubject to regulation 
20(4), be paid a qualifying allowance as from the third 
anniversary of the date of the examination. 
 (2) Where a constable is not promoted within three 
years after being recommended by the Board for promotion, 
he shall be paid a qualif ying allowance as from the third 
anniversary of the date of the recommendation. 
 (3) The qualifying allowance shall be equal to an 
increment payable in the officer‘s salary range. 
 (4) When an officer, who is in receipt of the 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 57 
qualifying allowance, is promoted he shall not be paid such 
an allowance from the date of his promotion.  
  (5) Where an officer is in receipt of the qualifying 
allowance on the date of his retirement and has been 
receiving this allowance for not less than three years from 
that date, the allowance shall be regarded as part of his 
salary for the purpose of computing his pension and 
gratuity. 
  
 PART VII  
HOURS OF WORK, RECORDS OF PERSONNEL AND 
PERFORMANCE APPRAISAL REPORTS 
  
 Hours of Work 
  
Work week 
and 
working 
hours 
 66.(1) For the purpose of these regulations, a 
week shall consist of seven days, the normal working hours 
of which shall be forty hours. 
  (2) The normal daily period of duty for an officer in 
the Second Division shall not exceed eight hours, and this 
may be performed in one tour. 
 (3) An officer shall not normally be required to be 
on duty beyond a period of four hours without having a 
break of at least one hour after the end of such period. 
 (4) The period of time taken as a break shall not be 
considered as part of  the period of eight hours making up 
the normal daily period of duty. 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 58 
  (5) Every officer in the Second Division shall be 
granted in respect of any one week, two full days free from 
duty to be known as "weekly rest days" provided always 
that the normal wo rk week is not reduced to less than forty 
hours.  
  (6) The weekly rest days shall be in lieu of 
Saturdays and Sundays, any of which may be counted as a 
weekly rest day if taken as such. 
 (7) An officer in the Second Division shall in respect 
of work in excess of forty hours a week - 
(a)  be given commuted overtime pay or 
allowance at rates approved by the 
Minister of Finance; 
(b) be granted compensatory time off; or 
(c) where such time off is not practicable, be 
paid overtime pay at rates approved by 
the Minister of Finance. 
 (8) The time limit for determining whether 
compensatory time off may be granted shall be fixed by 
agreement between the Chief Personnel Officer and the 
appropriate recognised association. 
  (9) Except in special circumstances, no ove rtime 
claim shall be allowed if submitted after six months from the 
date the overtime was earned.  
  
Officer may 
be required 
 67. Notwithstanding anything contained in these 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 59 
to report 
for duty at 
any time 
regulations relating to hours of work, an officer  may be 
required to report for duty at any time if the exigencies of 
the Service so require. 
  
Transfer  68.(1)  Where the Commissioner proposes to transfer 
an officer, the Commissioner shall make an order of 
transfer in writing and shall give not less t han fourteen days 
notice to the officer who is to be transferred.  
  (2) In considering the transfer of an officer the 
Commissioner shall take into account any hardship that 
such transfer may occasion.  
  (3) Notwithstanding sub -regulation (1), where the  
exigencies of the  Service so require, the Commissioner 
may transfer an officer without notice. 
  
 Records of Personnel 
  
Personal 
record 
 69.(1) The Commissioner shall keep a personal 
record of each officer and it shall contain – 
(a) a description of the officer; 
(b) any change of name of the officer; 
(c) the officer's place and date of birth; 
(d) particulars of marriage, if any, and 
children, if any; 
(e) a record of service, if any, in any Naval, 
Military or Air Forces of a Commonwealth 
territory or in the Public Service; 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 60 
(f) a record of service, if any, in any other 
police service; 
(g) a record of the results of examinations at 
which the officer was a candidate; and 
(h) a record of service in the Service including 
particulars of all promotions, transfers, 
removals, injuries received , 
commendations, awards, punishments 
other than cautions, acting appointments, 
sick leave, academic qualifications, 
special or technical skills and training, and 
the date of his ceasing to be a member of 
the Service with the reason thereof. 
 (2) The Head of the Division or Branch under whom 
an officer on his first appointment is first transferred shall 
cause to be maintained a Divisional or Branch file, and on 
the officer‘s transfer from that Division or Branch, his 
Divisional or Branch file shall be sent d irect to the Head of 
his new Division or Branch.  
 (3) An inset sheet with comments by the Head of 
the Division or Branch shall be kept for each officer in a 
Division or Branch, and on his transfer from a Division or 
Branch the officer's inset sheet shall be sent as part of his 
Divisional or Branch file direct to the Head of his new 
Division or Branch. 
 (4) An officer may at his request in writing and at a 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 61 
time convenient to the Administration be allowed to peruse 
his personal record. 
 (5) An officer shall be informed in writing of any 
adverse reports or any commendations that are made on 
his inset sheet or personal record. 
  
Certificate 
of service 
to be given 
 70.(1) An officer who leaves the Service may be 
given a certificate of service stating his offic e and special 
skills and setting out the period of his service and in any 
other police service and the reason, cause or manner for 
his leaving the Service. 
  (2) The Commissioner may append to such 
certificate a recommendation with respect to the officer‘s  
efficiency and conduct. 
   (3) The personal record of a police officer who 
leaves the Police Service shall be kept for twenty years by 
the Commissioner who shall then forward it to the 
Government Archivist. 
  
  
 Performance Appraisal Reports 
  
Performanc
e appraisal 
reports 
 71.(1)  A performance appraisal report shall- 
(a) be in such form as may be prescribed by 
the Commissioner; 
(b) be made in respect of each officer 
whether he holds a permanent or 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 62 
temporary or an acting appointment or is 
employed for a specified period;  
(c) provide for communication to the officer of 
the nature of his job performance for the 
period under review, and his career 
potential; and  
(d) ensure the officer‘s participation in the 
establishment of the standards required in 
order that his job performance and career 
potential are accurately evaluated by the 
persons specified in the form. 
  (2) The officer in charge of the Division or Branch 
shall forward to the Commissioner in each year-  
 (a) in respect of each officer who is wit hin the 
scale of pay, a performance appraisal 
report not later than sixty days before an 
increment is due to an officer; and  
 (b) in respect of each officer who is at the 
maximum in the scale of pay or who 
receives a fixed pay, a performance 
appraisal re port not later than the 
anniversary of the date of appointment of 
an officer to the office.  
  (3) A performance appraisal report shall relate to the 
period of service during the immediately preceding twelve 
months.  



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 63 
  (4) The Commissioner shall cause an  assessment 
of the job performance and career potential of each officer 
to be made by the officer identified as the reporting officer 
in the performance appraisal report. 
  (5) A reporting officer shall, after ensuring that 
proper communication has occurr ed with the officer being 
assessed concerning that officer‘s job performance, record 
in the performance appraisal report-    
(a) the strengths and weaknesses of that 
officer‘s job performance based on the 
duties and standards previously agreed 
upon with that officer; 
(b) the means, if any, by which the officer‘s 
job performance  may be improved or his 
job satisfaction may be enhanced; 
(c) the training and developmental needs of 
that officer within the Service; 
(d) the future career potential of that officer  
and how it may be developed; and 
(e) the duties and standards of performance 
required of that officer for the next year. 
  (6) The reporting officer shall ensure that any 
commendation or award given to the officer shall be 
recorded in that officer‘s performance appraisal report. 
  (7) The officer being appraised may comment on 
the performance appraisal report on any aspect of it, 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 64 
whether it is satisfactory or not, and shall sign it. 
  (8) Notwithstanding regulation 191, and for the 
purpose of this regulation, an officer who is dissatisfied with 
his performance appraisal report is entitled to make a 
written complaint directly to an officer of a rank higher than 
the officer in charge of his Division or Branch. 
  (9) The officer who makes a complaint under  sub-
regulation (8) shall set out the specific nature of his 
dissatisfaction and is entitled to be heard by the officer to 
whom he has made the complaint and who shall make a 
final decision on the matter. 
  
Officer to 
be 
informed of 
adverse 
report 
 72. In order that an officer may be given every 
opportunity to correct any shortcomings which he might 
evince during the course of the twelve months‘ period of 
service to be reported on under regulation 71, the officer in 
charge of his Division or Branch shall cause the officer to 
be informed in writing when- 
 (a) such shortcomings are noticed; 
 (b) adverse markings are included in the 
performance appraisal report before he 
submits the report to the Commissioner. 
  
Annual 
increments 
 73.(1)   A performance a ppraisal report made in 
respect of an officer under regulation 71 shall be the basis 
for determining the eligibility of an officer for an increment.  



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 65 
  (2) Where the officer in charge of a Division or 
Branch, in a report made under regulation 71, recommen ds 
that an increment ought not to be granted, he shall notify 
the officer in writing, not later than sixty days before the 
increment is due, of the reasons for which he considers that 
the increment ought not to be granted. 
 (3) Where an officer is notified under sub-regulation 
(2), he may, within seven days of the receipt of such 
notification, make representations in writing through the 
officer in charge of his Division or Branch to the 
Commissioner. 
  (4) An annual increment shall not be suspended 
except on the authority of the Commissioner.  
  (5) Where the Commissioner, after considering any 
representation by an officer made under sub -regulation (3), 
supports the recommendation of the officer in charge of his 
Division or Branch referred to in sub -regulation (2), or 
where in the opinion of the Commissioner a report made 
under regulation 71 does not justify the payment of an 
increment to the officer, the Commissioner shall notify the 
officer in writing of his decision to suspend the payment of 
the increment.  
  (6) Subject to sub-regulation (7), the Commissioner 
may suspend the payment of an increment under sub -
regulation (5) for a period not exceeding six months.  
  (7) Where the Commissioner suspends an 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 66 
increment to an officer under sub -regulation (5) f or a 
specified period, the officer in charge of the Division or 
Branch shall, not less than thirty days before the expiration 
of the specified period, make a report on such officer and if 
in the opinion of the Commissioner - 
 (a) the report justifies the payment of the 
increment, the Commissioner shall grant 
the increment which shall be payable from 
the date from which it is granted; or 
 (b) the report does not justify the payment of 
the increment, the Commissioner may 
suspend the payment of the increment  for 
a further period not exceeding six months.  
  (8) Where the Commissioner suspends the 
payment of an increment to an officer under this regulation, 
the suspension shall not affect the officer‘s incremental 
date.  
  
 PART VIII 
VACATION LEAVE, SPECIAL LEAVE, AND MEDICAL 
MATTERS 
  
Leave to be 
granted in 
accordance 
with this 
Part 
 74.(1) Subject to sub-regulations (2) and (3), and 
unless otherwise stated in these regulations, leave of 
absence may be granted to an officer to the extent and 
under such conditions as are provided in this Part. 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 67 
  (2) Leave, other than sick leave, injury leave and 
maternity leave, shall be granted subject to the exigencies 
of the Service. 
 (3) The Commissioner shall determine whether the 
exigencies of the Service are such as to enable an officer to 
proceed on leave at any given time. 
 (4) The Commissioner may, if the exigencies of the 
Service so require - 
(a) cancel any leave already granted; 
  (b) recall to duty an officer who has 
proceeded on leave. 
  
  Vacation Leave 
  
Eligibility 
for 
vacation 
leave 
 75.(1) An officer is eligible for vacation leave 
each year only after the completion of one year of service. 
 (2) Where an officer has been recalled from 
vacation leave, he is eligible for the unexpired period of 
such leave. 
 (3) An officer who is recalled from vacation leave 
shall be reimbursed for any reasonable out -of-pocket 
expenses, including actual financial loss sustained as a 
consequence of the decision to recall him from such leave. 
 (4) The period of training undert aken by a trainee 
who is appointed as an officer shall be considered in the 
computation of that officer‘s vacation leave. 
  



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 68 
Vacation 
leave 
entitlement 
 76.(1) An officer is entitled to vacation leave 
each year as follows: 
 Grade Years of 
Service 
Working Days 
    
 1-9 1-10 28 working days 
    
 1-9 Over 10 years 35 working days 
    
 
 
 
Chap. 32:52 
 (2) In computing length of service for the purpose of 
sub-regulation (1), service shall include "other public 
service" and "service in the group" as defined in section 2 of 
the Pensions Act. 
 (3) In calculating vacation leave, Saturdays, 
Sundays and public holidays shall not be counted. 
  (4) No more than fifteen percent of the officers 
assigned to any Division or Branch may be granted leave at 
any one time. 
  
Vacation 
leave not to 
be earned 
while on 
leave 
 77. An officer shall not earn vacation leave while on 
vacation leave or extended sick leave. 
  
Vacation 
leave to be 
taken 
annually 
 78. Subject to the exigencies of the Service, an 
officer shall proce ed on annual vacation leave as provided 
for in regulation 76(1), and where the leave taken is less 
than his maximum leave, the amount of leave taken shall 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 69 
be deducted from his vacation leave entitlement specified in 
regulation 76(1) for his grade. 
  
Deferment 
of vacation 
leave 
 79. An officer who, owing to the exigencies of the 
Service, is required to defer his vacation leave, shall, in the 
year following that in which his vacation leave was deferred, 
be granted such deferred vacation leave together with the 
vacation leave for that year. 
  
Casual 
absences 
to be 
deducted 
from 
vacation 
leave 
 80.(1) Subject to regulation 76, an officer may, 
with the prior written approval of the Commissioner, be 
allowed casual absences from duty, which shall be 
deducted fr om his vacation leave entitlement specified in 
regulation 76(1) for his grade to a maximum of – 
(a) fourteen working days if he holds an office 
in the First Division; or 
(b) seven working days if he holds an office in 
the Second Division. 
   (2) Notwithstanding regulation 75(1), the 
Commissioner may apply sub -regulation (1) to meet the 
case of an officer who has not completed a full year of 
service, but leave so granted shall not exceed the total 
amount of vacation leave that the officer can be considered 
as having earned on a pro rata basis at the time of the grant 
of such leave. 
  
Non-  81. Vacation leave, once earned, shall not be 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 70 
forfeiture of 
vacation 
leave 
earned 
forfeited. 
  
Accumulati
on of 
vacation 
leave 
 82.(1) Vacation leave may normally be 
accumulated, with the approval of the Commissioner, to a 
maximum of -  
(a) ninety working  days, in the case of an 
officer in the First Division; 
(b) sixty working days, in the case of an 
officer in the Second Division. 
 (2) An officer may accumulate leave in excess of  
the maximum specified in sub -regulation (1) with the 
approval of the Commissioner.  
 (3) Where, upon the coming into force of these 
Regulations, an officer has accumulated annual leave in 
excess of ninety days, he may be required to take all or 
such part of the excess as is agreed upon by the 
Commissioner. 
  
Grant of 
vacation 
leave  
 83.(1) Subject to sub -regulation (2), the 
Commissioner shall have authority to grant vacation leave 
to all officers. 
 (2) Vacation leave in the case of the Commissioner 
or a Deputy Commissioner shall require the approval of the 
Minister. 
  



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 71 
Application 
for 
vacation 
leave 
 84.(1) An application for vacation leave to be 
spent in or out of Trinidad and Tobago shall be submitted to 
the Commissioner, on the prescribed form, not l ater than 
31st October in the preceding year to facilitate the 
preparation of the leave roaster for the year ahead. 
   (2) The Commissioner may in special 
circumstances vary the requirement of sub-regulation (1). 
   (3) An officer who has applied for vacat ion leave 
within the specified time shall, subject to the exigencies of 
the Service, be informed not less than one month before his 
vacation leave is due to commence, whether or not his 
application has been granted. 
  
Record of 
officers on 
leave 
 85. The Commissioner shall cause a record to be 
kept to show - 
(a) the officers to whom he has granted 
leave; 
(b) particulars of the duration of such leave; 
(c) the address at or other means of contact 
by which an officer may be located during 
his leave. 
  
Attending 
court while 
on vacation 
leave 
 86. An officer who is required to attend court while 
on vacation leave as a result of his official duty shall have 
his vacation leave extended by a period equal to the 
number of days he has attended court. 
  



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 72 
 Special Leave 
  
Duty leave 
and special 
leave 
 87.(1) An officer selected as a member of an 
official Police Service team as approved by the 
Commissioner and engaging in a sporting, educational or 
cultural event or series of such events may, subject to the 
exigencies of the S ervice, be granted duty leave with full 
pay for such purpose. 
   (2) An officer selected to represent Trinidad and 
Tobago as a member of a national team engaging in a 
sporting, educational or cultural event or series of such 
events shall, subject to the ex igencies of the Service, be 
granted special leave with full pay to enable him to 
complete his engagement. 
   (3) Leave granted under this regulation shall not 
affect an officer's entitlement to vacation leave. 
 
 
 
Scholarshi
p and study 
leave 
 88. (1) An o fficer granted a scholarship sponsored by 
the Government is eligible for study leave and for such 
allowances and benefits as may from time to time be 
provided for other public officers. 
(2) An officer who undertakes a course of study 
approved by the Commis sioner is eligible for study leave 
and for such allowances and benefits as may from time to 
time be provided for other public officers. 
  
Sick leave  89.(1) An officer is entitled to fourteen days sick 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 73 
leave a year. 
      (2) An officer who is away from duty, due to 
illness, for a period-  
(a) not exceeding two days is not required to 
tender a medical certificate; or 
(b) exceeding two days shall submit a 
medical certificate prepared and signed by 
a duly qualified medical practitioner, 
and any leave taken under th is regulation shall count in 
calculating the total sick leave for the year.  
 (3) An officer mentioned in sub -regulation (2)(a) 
shall, by any means, inform the Second Division officer or 
the officer in charge of the shift or the police station where 
he is posted at least two hours before he is due to report for 
duty that he would be away from duty. 
 (4) The Commissioner may require an officer who 
habitually takes advantage of sub -regulation (2)(a) to 
present himself to a Government medical officer for a 
medical examination.    
  
Extension 
of sick 
leave in 
Trinidad 
and 
Tobago 
 
 90.(1) An officer who seeks an extension of sick 
leave while in the country shall apply to the Commissioner 
in writing and the application shall be  supported by a 
medical certificat e issued by a duly  qualified medical 
practitioner,  a duly qualified medical practitioner attached 
to the Service or the duly qualified medical practitioner in 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 74 
the medical institution where the officer has been treated 
and who treated the officer. 
  (2) An officer who seeks an extension of sick leave 
under sub -regulation (1) shall within the first three days 
inform, by any means, the Second Division officer in charge 
of the police station where he is posted or the Head of the 
Division, who shall communicat e such information to the 
Commissioner. 
  (2) Upon receipt of the application referred to in 
sub-regulation (1), the Commissioner may grant an 
extension of sick leave with full pay, partial pay or no pay 
and in accordance with the relevant guidelines issu ed by 
the Chief Personnel Officer.    
  (4) An officer shall make an application for 
extended sick leave in accordance with sub -regulation (1) 
within two days of his absence from duty. 
  (5) In exceptional circumstances, an application 
under sub -regulation (1) shall be made by the officer not 
later than seven days after his resumption of duty. 
  
Extension 
of sick 
leave 
outside of 
Trinidad 
and 
Tobago 
 
 91.(1) An officer who becomes sick whilst on 
vacation leave outside of the country and who has 
exhausted his sick leave entitlement shall immediately 
apply for an extension of sick leave through the 
Ambassador or other duly appointed Representative of 
Trinidad and Tobago and such an application shall be 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 75 
accompanied by a duly authenticated medical certificate. 
 (2) Subject to sub-regulation (3), upon receipt of the 
application referred to in sub -regulation (1), the 
Commissioner may grant an extension of sick leave with full 
pay, partial pay or no pay.    
 (3) An extension of sick leave on full pay shall be 
granted to an officer to the extent of, at maximum, the 
number of days sick leave unutilised by the officer over the 
five–year period preceding the year in which the application 
is made. 
 (4) When the time granted under sub -regulation (1) 
or (3) has expired and the officer has failed to resume duty, 
the Commissioner shall send a notice to the address given 
in regulation 132(2) ordering him to appear before a 
Medical Board stating the time and place for such 
appearance. 
 (5) The Commissioner shall publish once  in the 
Gazette and twice in two daily newspapers the name of 
each officer who is required to appear before a Medical 
Board stating the time and place for such appearance. 
 (6) If the officer fails to appear before the Medical 
Board within one month from t he date of the notice 
mentioned in sub -regulation (5), he is deemed to have 
abandoned his office and may be dismissed from the 
Service by the Commissioner. 
 (7) An officer who is certified by a Medical Board to 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 76 
be suffering from such disease as renders him unfit for duty 
may be granted sick leave on full pay for a period not 
exceeding six months.  
 (8) If after the period mentioned in sub -regulation 
(7) the officer is unfit for duty, he may be granted vacation 
leave, if any, for which he is eligible. 
 (9) If after his sick leave and vacation leave, an 
officer is still unfit to assume duty, he is deemed unfit for the 
Service and his services shall be terminated by the 
Commissioner, with such benefits that may have accrued to 
him.     
  (10) Where on the comm encement of these 
regulations an officer who is abroad and has exhausted all 
his sick leave and entitlement to an extension of sick leave 
and has not resumed duty, sub -regulations (4), (5) and (6) 
shall apply.  
  
  
Medical 
certificate 
necessary 
for sick 
leave 
 92. Absence from duty for more than two 
consecutive days shall not in any circumstances be 
considered as sick leave unless supported by a medical 
certificate issued by a duly qualified medical practitioner. 
  
Medical 
record of 
each officer 
 93.(1) A Medical History Book shall be kept to 
show in respect of each officer every illness, results of 
random testing for dangerous drugs and injury sustained by 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 77 
the officer during his period of service, together with such 
account of treatment received and ot her comments and 
recommendations made by the duly qualified medical 
practitioner attached to the Service or the duly qualified 
medical practitioner concerned with the case, as well as a 
record of all sick leave granted. 
 (2) Every Medical History Book shal l be kept 
confidential by the person in charge at the Police Hospital. 
 (3) The Commissioner shall have the power to 
order random drug testing for abuse of dangerous drugs by 
any officer. 
  
Entitlement 
to full pay 
 94. Where an officer is injured in the performance of 
his official duty he is entitled to his remuneration for any 
leave approved by the Commissioner as a result of such 
injury or until he is discharged by a Medical Board.  
  
Light duty 
in certain 
circumstan
ces 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 95.(1) The Commissioner may direct that a 
female officer qualifying for maternity leave shall be given 
light duties to perform at work prior to and following her 
period of maternity leave and for such period of time as the 
circumstances of her case may just ify and may permit or 
require such officer to attend work not in uniform for such 
period of time, but such officer shall not qualify for a Plain 
Clothes Allowance. 
 (2) For the purpose of this section ―maternity leave‖ 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 78 
Act No. 4 of 
1998. 
has the same meaning assigned to it b y the Maternity 
Protection Act, 1998. 
Grant of 
paternity 
leave 
 
 96.(1) A male officer is eligible for paternity leave 
of four working days in respect of each pregnancy of his 
wife or cohabitant, to be granted at the time of delivery 
where – 
(a) he furnishes a medical certificate stating 
the expected date of delivery; and 
(b) he registers the name of his cohabitant, 
where applicable, with the Commissioner. 
 (2) For the purpose of this regulation, ―cohabitant‖ 
means a woman who is living with the officer in a bona fide 
domestic relationship for a period of not less than five years 
immediately preceding the pregnancy, but only one such 
woman shall be considered for the purpose of this 
regulation.    
  
Grant of 
bereaveme
nt leave 
 97.(1)   An officer is eligible for the grant of 
bereavement leave of: 
(a) three working days where the death of a 
member of his immediate family occurs in 
Trinidad and Tobago; or 
(b) five working days where such a death 
occurs outside of Trinidad and Tobago 
and the officer actually travels abroad i n 
connection with the death. 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 79 
 (2) When an officer is granted bereavement leave 
under sub -regulation (1)(b), he shall submit to the 
Commissioner within two weeks of his return documentary 
evidence of his travel abroad. 
   (3) For the purpose of this regulat ion, "immediate 
family" means the officer's spouse, child, mother, father, 
brother, sister and, if the officer had registered his guardian, 
ward or cohabitant with the Commissioner, such guardian, 
ward or cohabitant. 
  
  
  
 Medical Matters 
  
Officer 
entitled to 
free 
medical, 
etc. 
attention 
 98.(1) An officer  who is injured in the course of 
his duty is entitled to receive free medical, dental, optical 
and hospital treatment and medicines as may be necessary 
and as may be provided by a Government Medic al Officer 
or at a Government medical institution.  
  (2) Where treatment or medicines mentioned in 
sub-regulation (1) are not readily available from a 
Government Medical Officer or from a Government medical 
institution the officer shall be reimbursed the  reasonable 
cost of any private treatment he may have received or 
medicines he may have purchased from any registered 
medical practitioner or from any approved medical 
institution having obtained the prior written approval of the 
Commissioner. 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 80 
  (3) An officer who – 
(a) is injured in the course of his duty and is 
forced to retire on medical grounds; or 
(b) has served up to his compulsory 
retirement age,  
is entitled to medical treatment as if he is still an officer in 
the Service. 
  (4) Where an officer i s injured in the course of his 
duty and has to travel abroad to seek medical, dental, and 
optical or hospital treatment, the cost of the airfare and any 
such treatment shall be provided by the Government. 
  
 PART IX - CUSTODY AND CARE OF PRISONERS 
  
Key for 
female cell 
 99.(1) The cell for female prisoners shall be provided 
with two locks or padlocks fitted with different keys, and the 
key of one lock shall be kept by the officer in charge of the 
Charge Room and the key of the other by a female officer. 
 (2) A duplicate of the key kept by the female officer 
shall be kept in the Charge Room under the station seal. 
 (3) Except in a case of emergency, no cell in which 
a female prisoner is confined shall be opened except by or 
in the presence of a female officer. 
  
Opening of 
cell 
 100. A cell in which prisoners are confined shall be 
opened by not less than two officers. 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 81 
  
Searching 
of prisoner 
 101.(1) A prisoner shall be searched on arrest, on 
arrival at the Police Station and immediately before being 
placed in a cell and again on being taken from the cell. 
 (2) At a Police Station a male prisoner shall be 
searched by two male officers and a female prisoner by a 
female officer. 
  
Record to 
be kept of 
prisoner’s 
property 
 102.(1)  All property found on a prisoner when he 
is searched shall be taken from him and a record shall be 
made in the charge book, and this entry shall be read over 
to the prisoner who shall be asked to verify and to sign it as 
being correct. 
  (2) If the prisoner claims that the entr y is incorrect, 
a note to this effect shall be made immediately against the 
entry by the most senior officer present and he shall report 
the matter to the officer in charge of the Division for 
immediate investigation. 
 (3) Property required as a court exhi bit shall be 
retained and handed over to the General Property Keeper. 
  (4) A prisoner's property shall be returned to him on 
his release from custody and he shall be required to sign for 
receipt of it in the Charge Book. 
  (5) A prisoner's property in the  possession of the 
Police for more than forty -eight hours shall be handed over 
to the General Property Keeper and transferred to the 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 82 
General Property Register. 
  (6) If a prisoner is handed over to a gaoler, the 
prisoner‘s property shall also be handed ove r to the gaoler, 
who shall give a receipt to the Police for it.  
  
Prisoner's 
property 
handed 
over 
 103. Subject to regulation 102(3), the property taken 
from a prisoner may be handed over to any person as 
directed by the prisoner, on such person giving a receipt for 
having received the property and the prisoner certifying that 
this has been done by signing the Charge Book or the 
General Property Register. 
  
Prisoner in 
cell to be 
visited  
 104. Unless as otherwise directed, the officer in 
charge of the  Reception Area shall visit a prisoner in a 
police cell at least once every hour. 
  
Children of 
prisoner in 
custody  
 105.(1) The children of a prisoner, who have no 
relatives or other persons to take charge of them, may be 
taken charge of by a female of ficer and taken to a place of 
safety until other arrangements for their care can be made.   
 (2) The female officer shall be paid at such rate for 
each child cared for under sub -regulation (1) as the 
Commissioner may direct. 
  
Feeding of 
prisoner 
 106.(1) The Commissioner shall fix the daily ration for 
a prisoner in police custody. 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 83 
(2) A prisoner shall be fed three times daily at 
7:30 a.m., 12:30 p.m. and 5:30 p.m. or as near as possible 
to these hours. 
(3) A prisoner may be supplied with food from 
outside, but the officer in charge of the Reception Area shall 
examine all such food. 
  
Legal 
adviser to 
prisoner 
 107. The legal adviser of a prisoner shall be allowed 
to communicate with the prisoner in private at a Police 
Station but the prisoner must be ke pt in sight by an officer 
during such communication. 
  
Sick 
prisoner 
 108.(1) When a prisoner reports sick, the senior 
officer at the Police Station shall immediately notify the 
appropriate Government Medical Officer or take the 
prisoner to a duly qualif ied medical practitioner or medical 
institution. 
 (2) Upon notice under sub -regulation (1), the 
Government Medical Officer, duly qualified medical 
practitioner or medical institution may order the prisoner be 
taken to a public hospital and he shall be esco rted to such 
hospital in custody.  
  
Numerical 
strength of 
escort 
 109. The strength of an escort to be provided for the 
removal of prisoners, except those conveyed in a prison 
van, shall be regulated as follows: 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 84 
 (a) one prisoner shall be accompanied by at  
least one officer; 
(b) two to five prisoners shall be 
accompanied by at least two officers; 
(c) six to ten prisoners shall be accompanied 
by at least three officers. 
  
Prison van  110. In the case of prisoners being conveyed in a 
prison van, there shall be at l east two officers in addition to 
the driver. 
  
Dangerous 
prisoner 
 111. In the case of a prisoner considered to be 
dangerous and unruly additional officers shall be sent as 
may be necessary. 
  
Handcuffs  112. An officer on escort duty shall be provided  with 
handcuffs that shall be used when necessary. 
  
Armed 
escort 
 113. An officer escorting prisoners may be armed if 
the circumstances so warrant. 
  
 PART X –  
GOVERNMENT BUILDING, FURNITURE, HOSPITAL, 
ETC. 
  
Quarters  114.(1) An officer may reside  in official quarters 
provided or in quarters approved by the Minister. 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 85 
(2) An  officer in the First Division who occupies 
official quarters shall do so furnished and rent-free. 
(3)  An officer in the Second Division who 
occupies official quarters shall do so rent-free. 
  
Furniture to 
be kept in 
good 
condition 
 115. All government furniture in Police Stations, 
buildings, offices and quarters shall be maintained in good 
order and condition, the responsibility for which shall rest 
with the senior officer in charge of the Police Station, 
building or office, or the occupant of the quarters. 
  
Repair to or 
replacemen
t of 
furniture 
 116. When any government furniture referred to in 
regulation 115 requires repair or needs to be replaced the 
appropriate officer o f the relevant Ministry shall be notified 
so that inspection, repairs or replacements may be effected. 
  
Notice 
board 
 117. All proclamations, Government Notices or other 
official notices, notices of rewards or advertisements of 
similar import shall be p osted on notice boards at each 
Police Station.  
  
Reception 
area 
 118. A Reception Area shall be attached to each 
Police Station and all books and records of the Station shall 
be kept and maintained in it and in the manner directed by 
the Commissioner.  
  



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 86 
Prisoner's 
cells 
 119. There shall be at least two prisoners' cells 
provided at each Police Station – one for adult male 
prisoners and the other for adult female prisoners. 
  
Hospital  120.(1)  A hospital for the treatment of officers 
shall be establ ished at any place as may be approved by 
the Minister assigned responsibility for health. 
 (2) To every such hospital there shall be appointed 
the appropriate staff for its proper administration including 
medical officers, nurses, pharmacists and other staff.    
 (3) Trained attendants shall also be appointed for 
the maintenance of proper discipline among patients, for 
the safe custody of the drugs, fittings and equipment, and 
for the cleanliness and good order of the premises. 
  
 PART XI 
UNIFORM, EQUIPMENT, ARMS, STORES, ETC. 
  
Uniform 
and orders 
of dress 
Appendix C 
and D 
 121. The description of all items of uniform and the 
orders of dress to be worn by officers shall be as set out in 
Appendix C and D or as prescribed by the Commissioner 
with the appro val of the Minister and shall be published in 
the Gazette. 
  
Unauthoris
ed badge 
or other 
decoration 
 122. An officer shall not whilst on duty in uniform 
wear a badge, emblem or other decoration other than those 
officially approved.  



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 87 
  
Issue of 
arms and 
ammunitio
n 
 123.(1) The Commissioner shall decide the quantity in 
which arms and ammunition may be issued to an officer, 
Division, Branch, Section or Station. 
 (2) The Commissioner may withdraw any arms and 
ammunition issued to an officer, Division, Branc h, Section 
or Station without assigning any reason for so doing. 
 (3) The authority of the Commissioner under this 
regulation is subject to the overriding authority of the 
Minister.  
  
Control of 
arms and 
ammunitio
n issued 
 124.(1) Ammunition issued to a  Division, Branch or 
Station that is not actually in use shall be kept in sealed 
boxes which shall be opened only in cases of inspection or 
emergency.  
 (2)  The type and quantity of arms and ammunition 
issued and the date of issue shall be endorsed on eac h 
box. 
 (3) When any ammunition is discharged or lost, an 
immediate report shall be made to the Commissioner 
setting out the quantity so discharged or lost and the 
circumstances relating to the discharge or loss of such 
ammunition. 
 (4)   The Commissioner shall cause to be kept a 
detailed account of all arms and ammunition received and 
issued. 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 88 
 (5)   No arms or ammunition shall be issued except on 
the written authority of the Commissioner or a Deputy 
Commissioner. 
  
Issue of 
uniform 
 125. Uniforms, including accessories, and equipment 
shall be issued to an officer in such quantities and at such 
periods as the Commissioner may direct. 
  
Wearing of 
uniform 
and plain 
clothes 
 126.(1)  The Commissioner may, in special 
circumstances, require an officer to wea r uniform when off 
duty.  
 (2) An officer shall not wear plain clothes whilst on 
duty, unless he is so authorised by the Commissioner. 
  
Issue of 
stores 
 127. Miscellaneous stores shall be issued to 
Divisions, Branches and Stations at such intervals and in 
such quantities as the Commissioner may direct.   
Issue of 
bedding 
 128. Articles of bedding shall be issued to an officer 
in such quantities and at such periods as the Commissioner 
may direct.  
  
Requisition  129.(1) Uniform, equipment and stores sh all be 
supplied only on a requisition made to the person 
responsible for finance. 
  (2) A delivery and receipt voucher signed by the 
officer issuing the stores shall be sent with the stores, and 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 89 
on receipt, the voucher shall be signed by the officer 
receiving the stores and returned to the person responsible 
for finance. 
  
Stores 
Ledgers 
 130.(1) Stores Ledgers shall be kept by the person 
responsible for finance in which he shall enter all stores 
received, issued and returned to store.  
 (2) Receipts for all articles returned to store shall be 
given by the person responsible for finance. 
  
 PART XII – CONDUCT 
  
Duties of 
an 
 Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 131.(1) An officer's whole time shall be at the disposal 
of the Government.   
 (2) An officer in the First Division who is in charge 
of a Division or Branch shall be responsible for the state of 
his command as well as the state of his district and for the 
conduct and efficiency of all the officers under his 
command. 
 (3) An offic er in the Second Division who is in 
charge of a Police Station shall be responsible for such 
Station and its district and for the conduct and efficiency of 
all the officers under his charge. 
 (4) In the absence of an officer referred to in sub -
regulation (2) or (3), the authority and responsibility of that 
officer shall devolve upon the next in seniority unless the 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 90 
 
 
 
Absence 
without 
leave 
Commissioner otherwise specifically directs. 
132. (1) Subject to sub -regulation (2), an officer shall 
not leave the country without the permission in writing of the 
Commissioner. 
(2) An officer who has been granted permission 
to go abroad shall supply the Commissioner with both a 
local and foreign address, to which any correspondence 
may be sent by registered mail and any correspondence 
sent to both addresses is deemed to have been received by 
him. 
(3) In an emergency, such permission may be 
given by an officer of the First Division to an officer in the 
Second Division, and in the case of an officer in the First 
Division by an officer senior in rank.  
 (4) Where an officer grants permission under 
sub-regulation (3) he shall report the fact immediately in 
writing to the Commissioner 
 
 
   
  
Activities 
outside the 
Service 
 133.  An  officer -  
(a) shall not  engage in any activity, 
occupation or und ertaking which would 
impair his usefulness as an officer or in 
any way conflict with the interest of the 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 91 
Service;  
 (b) shall not without the consent of the 
Commissioner, accept any paid 
employment or engage in any trade or 
any professional, commercial, agricultural 
or industrial undertaking, or undertake 
private work for remuneration, whether in 
or outside of Trinidad and Tobago; 
 (c) who invests in or acquires shares in any 
company carrying on business in or 
outside of Trinidad and Tobago or who 
acquires any interest in any professional, 
commercial, agricultural or industrial 
undertaking in or outside of Trinidad and 
Tobago shall, within thirty days after his 
investment or acquisition, inform the 
Commissioner of the fact in writing. 
  
Officer not 
to call or 
participate 
in certain 
public 
meeting 
 134.(1)  An officer shall not call a public meeting to 
consider any action of the Government or actively 
participate in the proceedings of a meeting called for such 
purpose or procure signatures to any public pe tition 
regarding the actions of the Government. 
     (2)  Nothing in these regulations shall affect an 
officer's right to participate actively in any meeting called or 
sign any petition prepared by his appropriate recognised 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 92 
association on matters affecting the Service. 
  
Participati
on in 
demonstra
tion, etc. 
prohibited 
 135. An officer shall not institute or take part in any 
processions, demonstrations or public meetings other than 
religious functions unless the permission of the 
Commissioner is first obtained. 
  
Officer not 
to publish 
informatio
n 
 136.(1) An officer shall not make public or 
communicate to the press or to any person, or make 
private copies of documents, papers or information of 
which he may have become possessed in his official 
capacity, unless his duties require him to do so. 
     (2)  Notwithstanding that he may be charged with 
an offence under any other written law, an officer who 
contravenes sub -regulation (1) commits a disciplinary 
offence. 
  
Officer not 
to allow 
interview 
on 
question of 
public 
policy 
 137.  An officer, whether on duty or on leave of 
absence, shall not allow himself to be interviewed on 
questions of public policy or on matters affecting the 
defence or military resources of Trinidad and Tobago or of 
any other count ry unless his officials duties require him to 
do so. 
  
Officer  not 
to publish 
comment 
on national 
 138.(1) An officer shall not, without the written 
permission of the Commissioner, broadcast on the radio, 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 93 
or local 
matter  
television, Internet or by any other means or publish in any 
manner any statement which is in the nature of a personal 
comment on any national or local political or administrative 
matter unless his official duties require him to do so. 
     (2)  An officer may, with the written permiss ion of 
the Commissioner, publish in his own name articles 
relating to other subjects of general interest, or give a 
lecture or presentation on the radio, television or Internet 
on such subjects. 
  
Partisanshi
p 
 139. An officer shall not make any public e xpression 
of political and sectarian opinions, and shall bear himself 
with strict impartiality in all matters. 
  
Officer not 
to 
contribute 
to, edit or 
manage 
newspaper 
 140.  An officer shall not act as editor of a newspaper 
or take part directly or indi rectly in the management of a 
newspaper, or contribute thereto any statement or article 
which may reasonably be regarded as a commentary on 
the politics of the country or the administration of the 
Government or that of any other Government. 
  
Rules 
relating to 
lecture or 
presentatio
n 
 141.(1)  A lecture or  presentation by an officer 
shall be governed by the following rules: 
 (a) no question of payment either to the 
officer employed in the preparation or 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 94 
delivery of the lecture or presentation, or 
to the Service, shall arise in connection 
with the lecture or presentation that is 
necessary or desirable in order to enable 
the Service to carry out its recognised 
duties to the community; 
(b) a lecture or presentation which is not 
necessary for departmental pur poses 
may be given by an officer who is an 
expert in a particular subject, whether or 
not he has specialised in this subject in 
his official capacity; and in all such cases, 
if the subject matter is related to the work 
or the policy of the Service, or if t he 
officer is to be announced by his 
departmental title, the prior written 
permission of the Commissioner is 
required with the object of ensuring - 
 (i) that there is nothing in the lecture or 
presentation contrary to the public 
interest or inconsistent w ith the 
status of an officer; and  
(ii) that the standing of the officer is 
sufficient to justify the delivery by 
him of a lecture or presentation 
under his departmental title. 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 95 
(2) Subject to sub -regulation (1), and to the due 
observance of any professional rule that may be in force as 
to the acceptance of remuneration for the preparation or 
delivery of a lecture or presentation, an officer is entitled to 
make his own terms with the broadcasting authority, but in 
these cases the work involved in the prepara tion and 
delivery of the lecture or presentation shall be done outside 
official hours. 
  
Reprimand 
of officers 
 142. A senior officer shall not berate an officer junior 
in rank in the presence or hearing of an officer junior to the 
officer being berated or in the presence or hearing of any 
member of the public. 
  
Appearanc
e and turn-
out 
 143.(1) An officer shall always appear in the 
public view properly dressed, cleanly and smartly turned 
out, smart in his movements, and respectful in his bearing 
and manner. 
 (2) An officer on duty shall not wear items of 
jewellery and trinkets for personal adornment, except a 
wristwatch, a bracelet for ‗allergy alert‘ and no more than 
two rings. 
 (3) In the case of a male officer on duty – 
(a) the hair on his head shall be kept short; 
(b) the chin and under lip shaven; 
(c) whiskers shall not be worn; and 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 96 
(d) the shaving of the upper lip is optional.  
  (4) In the case of a female officer on duty – 
(a) the hair on her head shall not be worn 
lower than the nape of her neck; 
(b) unnatural hair colours and hair 
decorations shall not be worn; 
(c) fingernails shall be kept short and only 
natural nail polish shall be used; and 
(d) make up shall be simple and kept to a 
minimum. 
  (5) When a female officer on duty is exempted 
from wearing - 
(a) regulation shoes, she shall wear footwear 
as prescribed by the Police Medical 
Officer or an orthopaedic specialist; 
(b) stockings by the Police Medical Officer or 
an orthopaedic specialist, she shall wear 
dark blue socks. 
  
Indebtedne
ss 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 144.(1) An officer shall not incur a debt that he knows 
or ought to know he is unable to discharge or which is 
likely to impair his efficiency or to bring the Service into 
disrepute.  
 (2)  The Commissioner may require an officer to 
authorise deductions from his pay for the repayment of any 
debt to the Government. 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 97 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 
E 
 (3) An officer who finds himself unable to 
discharge a debt he has incurred shall inform the 
Commissioner as soon as possible in the form prescribed 
in Appendix E. 
 (4) Where the Commissioner has reasonable 
grounds to believe that an officer is unable to discharge a 
debt which he has incurred, the Commissioner shall direct 
the officer to complete and submit the form prescribed in 
Appendix E within a specified period. 
  
Bankruptc
y 
 145. An officer who has been declared a bankrupt or 
against whom bankruptcy proceedings have been taken or 
who becomes insolvent shall within seven days of the 
occurrence of the fact report the fact in writing to the 
Commissioner. 
  
Gift or 
reward 
 146.  Except with the written permission of the 
Commissioner, an officer shall not accept a gift or reward 
from a member of the public or an organisation. 
  
Exception 
to gift  
 147.  Notwithstanding regulation 146 or 148, an 
officer may accept a gift offered by - 
(a) a representative of a foreign government 
on the occasion of an official visit to that 
country or on the visit of a representative 
of a foreign government to this country;  



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 98 
(b) a community organisation, on a social 
occasion where the gif t represents the 
appreciation of the organisation for his 
contribution to the work or achievement 
of the organisation;  
(c) any person on a celebratory occasion. 
  
  
Officer not 
to accept 
present 
from 
subordinat
e officer 
 148. An officer shall not recei ve a gift or reward from 
a subordinate officer except with the written permission of 
the Commissioner.  
  
Legal 
proceeding
s 
 149.(1) An officer who-  
(a) desires to initiate legal proceedings 
against any person; or  
(b) is charged with a criminal offence and is 
brought before a court, 
 shall promptly inform the Commissioner, in writing.   
  
Offences   150.(1) An officer who contravenes any of these 
regulations commits a disciplinary offence. 
     (2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub -
regulation (1), a n officer is liable to be charged with a 
disciplinary  offence if he commits any of the following: 
(a) Discreditable conduct, that is to say, if an 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 99 
officer acts in a disorderly manner 
prejudicial to discipline or reasonably 
likely to bring discredit to the Service;  
(b) Insubordinate or oppressive conduct, that 
is to say, if an officer – 
(i) is insubordinate by word, act or 
demeanour;  
(ii) is oppressive or tyrannical in his 
conduct towards an officer of a 
lower rank;  
(iii) uses obscene, abusive or insulting 
language to another officer; or 
(iv) assaults another officer;  
 (c) Disobedience to orders , that is to say, if 
an officer disobeys or without good and 
sufficient cause omits or neglects to carry 
out a lawful order, written or otherwise; 
(d) Neglect of duty, that is to say, if an officer 
– 
(i) neglects, or without good and 
sufficient cause omits, promptly and 
diligently to attend to or carry out 
anything which is his duty as an 
officer; 
(ii) withholds a report or allegation 
against another officer; 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 100 
(iii) is not alert while on duty;  
(iv) fails to work his beat in accordance 
with orders, or leaves his beat, 
point or other place of duty to which 
he has been ordered, without due 
permission or sufficient cause; 
(v) permits a prisoner to escape; 
(vi) fails to report a matter which is his 
duty to report;  
(vii) fails to report anything which he 
knows concerning a criminal 
charge, or fails to disclose any 
evidence which he, or any person 
within his knowledge, can give for 
or against any prisoner or 
defendant to a criminal charge;  
(viii) omits to make any neces sary entry 
in any official document or book; or 
(ix) neglects or without good and 
sufficient cause omits to carry out 
any lawful instruction of the Police 
Medical Officer or, while absent 
from duty on account of sickness, 
does any act or conduct calculated  
to retard his return to duty; 
 (e) Falsehood or prevarication, that is to say, 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 101 
if an officer – 
(i) knowingly makes or signs a false 
statement in an official document or 
book; 
(ii) wilfully or negligently makes any 
false, misleading or inaccurate 
statement; or 
(iii) without good and sufficient cause 
destroys or mutilates any official 
document or record, or alters or 
erases any entry therein; 
(f) Breach of confidence, that is to say, if an  
officer – 
(i) divulges any matter which it is his 
duty to keep secret;  
(ii) gives notice, directly or indirectly, to 
a person against whom a warrant or 
summons has been or is about to 
be issued, except in the lawful 
execution of such warrant or 
service of such summons;  
(iii) without proper authority 
communicates by any means to the 
public, p ress, or to any 
unauthorised person, any matter 
connected with the Service; 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 102 
(iv) without proper authority shows to 
any person outside the Service any 
book or written or printed document 
which is the property of the Service;  
(v) makes any anonymous 
communication to the Commission, 
Commissioner or an officer in a 
senior office; 
(vi) signs or circulates any petition or 
statement with regard to any matter 
concerning the Service, except 
through the proper channel; or  
(vii) calls or attends any unauthorised 
meeting to discuss any matter 
concerning the Service; 
(g) Corrupt practice, that is to say, if an 
officer – 
(i) fails to account for or to make a 
prompt and correct return of any 
money or property received by him 
in his official capacity;  
(ii) directly or indirectly solicits any 
gratuity, gift or reward, subscription 
or testimonial without the consent of 
the Commissioner; 
(iii) places himself under pecuniary 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 103 
obligation to any person who holds 
a licence concerning the granting or 
renewal of which the Police may 
have to report or give evidence; or 
(iv) improperly uses his position as an 
officer for his private advantage; 
 (h) Unlawful or unnecessary exercise of 
authority, that is to say, if an officer – 
(i) without good and sufficient cause 
makes an unlawful or unnecessary 
arrest; 
(ii) uses unnecessar y violence to a 
prisoner or other person with whom 
he may be brought into contact in 
the execution of his duty; or 
(iii) is uncivil to a member of the public; 
 (i) Malingering, that is to say, if an officer 
feigns or exaggerates any sickness or 
injury with a view to evading duty;  
(j) Absence without leave or being late for 
duty, that is to say, if an officer, without 
reasonable excuse, is absent without 
leave or is late for  any duty; 
(k) Loss or damage to clothing or other 
property supplied, that is to say, if  an 
officer – 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 104 
(i) wilfully or by carelessness 
abandons, causes any loss or 
damage to any clothing, 
accoutrements, or to any book, 
document or other property of the 
Service supplied to him or used by 
him or entrusted to his care; or 
(ii) fails to report any loss  or damage 
as mentioned in sub-paragraph (i);  
 (l) Drunkenness, or drug taking, that is to 
say, if an officer, while on or required for 
duty, is unfit for duty through the taking of 
intoxicating liquor or dangerous drugs;  
(m) Drinking on duty or soliciti ng drink, that is 
to say, if an officer – 
(i) drinks intoxicating liquor while he is 
on duty; or  
(ii) demands, or endeavours to 
persuade any other person to give 
him, or to purchase or obtain for 
him, any intoxicating liquor while he 
is on duty; 
(iii) reports for duty under the influence 
of intoxicating liquor or with the 
odour of intoxicating liquor on his 
breath; 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 105 
(n) Entering licensed premises, that is to say, 
if without permission or reasonable 
excuse an officer enters while on duty, 
any premises licens ed under any written 
law or any other premises where 
intoxicating liquor is stored or distributed;
  
 (o) Lending, borrowing or accepting money, 
that is to say, where an officer 
compromises his ability to discharge his 
responsibility by lending, borrowing or 
accepting money from another officer;  
(p) Being an accessory to a disciplinary 
offence, that is to say, if an officer 
connives at or is knowingly an accessory 
to a disciplinary offence;  
(q) Using any property or facility of the 
Service without the written consent of the 
Commissioner for a purpose not 
connected with his official duties. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chap. 
48:50 
 (3) An officer who is suspected of being under the 
influence of dangerous drugs or intoxicating liquor is 
required to submit to a breath test or ana lysis or a 
laboratory analysis to determine his blood alcohol 
concentration in accordance with the Motor Vehicles and 
Road Traffic Act. 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 106 
    PART XIII - DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURE 
  
Disciplinar
y 
proceeding
s 
 151. An officer who fails to comply with these 
regulations, or any order or directive for the time being in 
force in the Service commits a disciplinary offence and is 
liable to disciplinary proceedings in accordance with the 
procedure prescribed in this Part. 
  
Suspensio
n 
 152.(1) When a report or allegation is received by 
the Commissioner from which it appears that a police 
officer may have committed an offence, and the 
Commissioner is of the opinion that the public interest or 
the repute of the Service requires it, the Commissioner 
may in writing direc t the officer to cease to report for duty 
until further notice, and an officer so directed shall cease to 
perform the functions of his office immediately. 
  (2) An officer who is directed to cease to perform 
the duties of his office in accordance with sub -regulation 
(1) shall continue to receive full pay until such date as shall 
be specified in an order made by the Commissioner.  
  
Interdictio
n 
 153.(1)  Where disciplinary proceedings for his 
dismissal are instituted or criminal proceedings are 
instituted against an officer and the Commissioner is of the 
opinion that the public interest or the repute of the Service 
requires that the officer should immediately cease to 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 107 
perform the functions of his office, the Commissioner shall, 
before making a decision wh ether or not to interdict the 
officer, inform the officer in writing of his intention to 
interdict him and give the officer an opportunity to be 
heard.   
   (2) An officer interdicted shall receive such 
proportion of the pay of his office, not being less than one-
half, as the Commissioner may determine after taking into 
consideration the officer‘s monthly deductions. 
  (3) Where an officer is interdicted and criminal or 
disciplinary proceedings are determined in his favour, and 
notwithstanding an appeal is filed by the State in relation to 
the criminal proceedings, he is entitled to the full amount of 
the remuneration which he would have received if he had 
not been interdicted. 
  (4) Where a decision is given in favour of an officer 
interdicted under sub -regulation (1), the interdiction order 
shall immediately cease to have effect. 
  (5) If disciplinary proceedings against an officer 
result in any punishment other than dismissal the officer 
shall be allowed such pay as the Commissioner may in the 
circumstances determine. 
  (6) Where an officer is interdicted and criminal or 
disciplinary proceedings are not determined in his favour, 
and he files an application for review or an appeal, as the 
case may be, the interdiction order shall continue to have 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 108 
effect until the completion of the review or appellate 
process. 
  (7) Notwithstanding sub -regulations (2) to (6), the 
Commissioner may quash an interdiction order at any time 
and the officer is entitled to the full amount of the 
remuneration that he would have received if he had not 
been interdicted. 
  
Reporting 
in person 
 154. Where an officer is suspended under regulation 
152 or interdicted under regulation 153, he shall report in 
person once per month to the Head of the Division in the 
Division where he liv es, and the Head of the Division shall 
report that fact in writing to the Commissioner. 
  
Disciplinar
y tribunal 
 155.(1)   In the exercise of the powers vested in 
him by section 123A (2)(c) of the Constitution, the 
Commissioner may establish, in accordan ce with section 
123A(3) of the Constitution, disciplinary tribunals at any 
Branch or Division consisting of such number of officers as 
he considers necessary to conduct disciplinary 
proceedings. 
  (2) A disciplinary tribunal established by the 
Commissioner shall exercise such power as may be 
delegated to it by the Commissioner. 
  
Procedure 
on alleged 
 156.(1)  The Commissioner shall designate an officer 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 109 
commissio
n of 
offence 
of the First Division, who is not the head of the Division, as 
the ―disciplinary  officer‖ in each Division, Branch or 
Section, and the disciplinary officer shall be responsible for 
receiving all complaints against an officer by any person, 
including a member of the public or an officer, and he shall 
maintain a record of all such complaints. 
  (2) Where a member of the public or an officer 
makes a complaint against an officer (hereinafter referred 
to as ―the officer concerned‖) to another officer junior in 
rank to the officer concerned, or such junior officer finds 
the officer concerne d committing a disciplinary offence, 
such junior officer shall inform the disciplinary officer of the 
complaint as soon as possible in writing.  
  (3)  The disciplinary officer shall, within seven days 
from the date he is informed of the complaint under s ub-
regulation (2) or (11), appoint an investigating officer who 
shall give the officer concerned a written notice stating the 
specific nature of the complaint, that the matter shall be 
investigated and the officer concerned may, within seven 
days of receip t of the written notice, give to him an 
explanation in writing concerning the complaint. 
  (4) The investigating officer shall hold an office 
higher than that of the officer concerned. 
  (5) Subject to sub -regulation (6), the investigating 
officer shall promptly but not later than thirty days after his 
appointment investigate the matter, produce a report of his 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 110 
investigations and forward the report to the disciplinary 
officer. 
  (6) The investigating officer may apply to the 
disciplinary officer during t he time specified in sub -
regulation (5) for an extension of time but shall not be 
granted an extension exceeding thirty days to forward his 
report to the disciplinary officer. 
  (7) Where, in the explanation given under sub -
regulation (3), the officer con cerned makes an admission 
of guilt, the investigating officer shall forward the matter to 
the disciplinary officer who shall forward it to a disciplinary 
tribunal which shall determine the penalty to be imposed 
without further enquiry. 
  (8) Where the dis ciplinary officer, based on the 
results of the investigation under sub -regulation (3), finds 
that the complaint is without substance he shall so inform 
the officer concerned and the record of the complaint and 
of the investigation shall be immediately forw arded to the 
Commissioner for his final determination. 
  (9) Where the disciplinary officer, based on the 
results of the investigation under sub -regulation (3), finds 
that there is substance in the complaint he shall cause the 
officer concerned to be charged for any disciplinary offence 
disclosed and refer the matter to the disciplinary tribunal 
not later than twenty days from the date of the charge. 
  (10) The disciplinary officer shall cause a copy of 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 111 
the charge to be served on the officer concerned and  the 
charge shall contain the particulars of the time, date and 
place of the hearing. 
  (11) Where an officer finds an officer of a lower rank 
than him committing a disciplinary offence or receives a 
report from another officer or a member of the public, the 
senior officer shall warn the officer in writing that he may 
be charged for a disciplinary offence and shall refer the 
matter to the disciplinary officer immediately. 
  (12) Where an officer is warned under sub -
regulation (11), sub-regulation (2) shall not apply. 
  
Power of 
disciplinar
y tribunal 
 157.(1)  Where the officer admits the charge he 
shall be allowed to state any extenuating circumstances in 
mitigation and the disciplinary tribunal may impose any 
penalty within its delegated powers. 
 (2) Where the officer denies the charge the 
disciplinary tribunal shall proceed to hear and determine 
the matter. 
 (3) A disciplinary tribunal has the power to dismiss 
the charge on any ground, or find the officer guilty of the 
charge and impose a penalty that it is authorised to impose 
by the Commissioner in accordance with section 123A (3) 
of the Constitution.  
  
Duty of 
officers 
 158. (1) It shall be the duty of every person 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 112 
appointed 
to 
disciplinar
y tribunal  
appointed to hear the evidence, find the facts a nd 
determine the charge to do so as soon as possible. 
  (2) Where an officer who is a member of a 
disciplinary tribunal of three or more members is absent for 
whatever reason, including the grant of sick leave, the 
disciplinary tribunal may continue to he ar and determine 
the matter in the absence of that officer, but the tribunal 
shall not be constituted of less than two members. 
  
Officer on 
charge not 
to be 
permitted 
leave 
 159. An officer who is charged with an offence shall 
not, without the written permission of the Commissioner, be 
permitted to take leave, other than sick leave or maternity 
leave, until the determination of the charge. 
  
Procedure 
at hearing 
 160.(1)   Where an officer fails to give an explanation 
under regulation 156(2) or fails to admit or deny the charge 
the hearing shall proceed as though the officer denied the 
charge. 
   (2)  The following procedure shall apply to a 
hearing by a disciplinary tribunal: 
 (a) the officer shall be given full opportunity 
to defend himself; 
 (b) the case against the officer may be 
presented by another officer, but that 
officer shall be the holder of an office 
higher than that of the officer charged;  



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 113 
 (c) at the hearing the officer may conduct his 
defence either in person or may be 
represented by another officer of his 
choice or by his staff association or by an 
attorney-at-law, except where the hearing 
is before a disciplinary tribunal 
constituted of one officer, the officer 
charged shall not be represented by an 
attorney-at-law, and the officer o r his 
representative may cross -examine the 
witnesses called in support of the case 
against him; 
 (d) a true record of the proceedings shall be 
taken.  
  (3) Nothing in this regulation shall be construed so 
as to deprive the officer from making a submissi on at any 
time that the facts disclosed in the evidence do not support 
the charge. 
  
Witnesses  161. (1) The officer shall be allowed to state the 
names and addresses of any witnesses whom he may 
desire to give evidence at the hearing of the matter. 
  (2) Any such witness who is an officer shall be 
ordered to attend at the hearing and any other witness 
shall be given due notice that his attendance is desired and 
of the date, time and place of the hearing. 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 114 
  (3) The disciplinary tribunal may order that a  
witness be granted a sum for reasonable out of pocket 
expenses. 
  
Adjournme
nt of 
hearing 
 162. The hearing of any charge may be adjourned 
from time to time as may appear necessary for due hearing 
of the case, but not longer than fourteen days. 
  
Proceedin
gs in 
private 
 163.  The proceedings before a disciplinary tribunal 
shall be held in private. 
  
Hearing in 
absence of 
accused 
officer 
 164.   If an officer does not attend the hearing of the 
charge against him without good reason, the hearing may 
proceed and conclude in his absence, but if good reason is 
given to the disciplinary tribunal by or on behalf of the 
officer why he is unable to attend the hearing, the hearing 
shall be adjourned.  
  
Hearing in 
absence of 
prosecutor 
 165. Where the prosecut or is absent without 
satisfactory explanation, the disciplinary tribunal shall 
adjourn the matter and so inform the officer in charge of 
the Division or Branch where the prosecutor is posted and 
that officer shall make inquiries and inform the tribunal in 
writing before the next hearing why the prosecutor was 
absent. 
  



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 115 
Standard 
of proof 
 166.(1)  The standard of proof in any proceedings 
under this Part shall be that required in a court in civil 
cases. 
  (2) The rules governing the admissibility of 
evidence shall be observed but the rules relating to the 
proof of documents may be waived except where a 
document is an issue in the proceedings. 
  (3) No documentary evidence shall be used 
against the officer unless he has previously been supplied 
with a copy of it or given access to it. 
  
Tribunal to 
report 
 167.  The disciplinary tribunal shall make a 
confidential report to the Commissioner and the report shall 
contain the facts, decision, reasons and any comments 
thereon it considers advisable. 
  
Further 
offence 
before 
disciplinar
y tribunal  
 
 168.(1)  Where, during the course of the hearing of a 
charge, it appears to the disciplinary tribunal there is 
evidence which could form the basis of another charge for 
which the penalty is within its delegated auth ority, the 
disciplinary tribunal shall-  
 (a) cause the officer to be charged for the 
other offence; 
(b) proceed to hear and determine the 
original charge; and 
 (c) subject to sub -regulation (2), proceed to 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 116 
hear and determine the other charge.  
  (2) Where an officer is charged for another offence 
under sub -regulation (1), the disciplinary tribunal shall 
adjourn the hearing of the other offence, if requested by 
the officer, for not more than seven days. 
  
Disciplinar
y tribunal 
may report 
to 
Commissio
ner 
 169.(1)  Where a disciplinary tribunal has heard the 
evidence, found the facts and is of the opinion that the 
appropriate penalty for any offence is dismissal it shall 
make a report to the Commissioner. 
 (2) The Commissioner shall consider the report of 
the disciplinary tribunal submitted under sub -regulation (1) 
and may or may not dismiss the officer or impose any other 
penalty specified in regulation 173. 
  
Insufficient 
evidence  
before 
disciplinar
y tribunal 
 
 170.   Where a disciplinary tribunal on hearing the 
evidence finds that the evidence is insufficient to support 
the charge or charges it shall dismiss the matter, without 
calling on the officer for his defence.  
  
Informing 
officer of 
decision 
and his 
right of 
review 
 171.(1)  At the conclusion of a matter, the disciplinary 
tribunal shall inform the officer who is convicted that he 
may- 
 (a) appeal the decision of the tribunal to the 
Police Service Commission; and 
 (b) apply, in writing, to the Commissioner for 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 117 
a copy of the record of the proceedings. 
 (2) The Commissioner shall, as soon as possible 
after making a decision under regulation 169, inform the 
officer in writing of the - 
(a) decision; 
(b) right to appeal the decision to the Police 
Service Commission; and  
(c)  right to apply, in writing, to the  
Commissioner for a copy of the record of 
the proceedings.  
  (3) Where the officer – 
 (a) files an application for a review the 
penalty shall not take effect pending 
determination by the reviewing authority; 
 (b) does not file an application for review, the 
penalty shall take effect at the expiration 
of the time specified in any written law for 
filing such application. 
  (4) Where an officer is informed that the penalty 
imposed on him is dismissal, the officer, notwithstanding 
that he files an applicat ion for review within the time 
specified in the written law, shall not receive any pay or 
allowances from the date specified by the Commissioner. 
  (5) The failure to inform an officer of his right to file 
an application for review or to apply for a copy of the 
record of the proceedings shall not invalidate the decision 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 118 
of the Commissioner or a disciplinary tribunal. 
  
Commissio
ner may 
remove 
officer in 
public 
interest 
 172. Where, after considering the report of the 
disciplinary tribunal submitted under  regulation 168, the 
Commissioner is of the opinion that the officer does not 
deserve to be dismissed by reason of the charges alleged 
but that the proceedings disclose other grounds for 
removing him from the Service in the public interest, the 
Commissioner may make an order for the removal of the 
officer without recourse to the procedure prescribed by 
regulation 32. 
  
Penalties  173.(1)  The following are the penalties that may 
be imposed by the Commissioner in disciplinary 
proceedings brought against an  officer in respect of a 
disciplinary offence: 
 (a) dismissal, that is, termination of 
appointment; 
 (b) reduction in an office, that is, removal to 
another grade with an immediate 
reduction in pay; 
 (c) reduction of remuneration, that is, an 
immediate adjustment of remuneration to 
a lower point on the scale of 
remuneration attached to the particular 
office; 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 119 
 (d) deferment of increment, that is, a 
postponement of the date on which the 
next increment is due, with corresponding 
postponements in subsequent years; 
 (e) stoppage of increment, that is, no 
payment for a specified period of an 
increment otherwise due; 
 (f) fine; 
 (g) reprimand. 
  (2) Where a fine is imposed the amount of such 
fine shall be deducted from the pay of the officer in such 
manner as may be determined by the Commissioner. 
  
Non-
payment of 
remunerati
on on 
conviction 
for a 
criminal 
offence 
 174.(1) An officer convicted of a criminal charge and 
sentenced to imprisonment without the option of a fine or 
convicted of a criminal charge involving dishonesty or fraud 
shall not receive any pay or allowance after the date of 
conviction. 
  (2) The Commissioner may direct that an officer 
convicted of a criminal charge shall cease to perform the 
duties of his office immediately. 
  (3) Notwithstanding that an officer referred to in 
sub-regulation (1) has appealed against his conviction, he 
shall not receive any pay or allowance after the date of 
conviction. 
  



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 120 
 PART XIV - RECOGNITION OF POLICE SERVICE 
ASSOCIATION 
  
Interpretati
on of Part 
XIV 
 
 175.(1)  In this Part – 
"applicant association" means an association making 
an application; 
"application" means an application made under 
regulation 176; 
"association" means an association formed under 
section 34 of the Act; 
"member" means an officer who  has paid by way of 
subscription to an association for a continuous 
period of two months immediately prior to the 
date on which an application is made, the sum 
required by the rules of that association; 
"Minister" means the Minister assigned with 
responsibility for finance; 
"objecting association" means an association making 
an objection under regulation 180. 
    (2) For the purpose of these regulations, where an 
officer is a member of an appropriate recognised 
association, any subscription paid by him to any other 
association shall not be taken into account for the purpose 
of determining membership of that other association. 
  
Applicatio
n for 
 176.(1) An association seeking recognition as an 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 121 
recognitio
n 
appropriate association shall apply in writing to t he 
Minister. 
(2) An application shall be accompanied by – 
(a) a document from the Registrar General 
certifying that the rules of the association 
have been filed under section 36(2) of the 
Act; 
(b) a copy of the rules of the association; 
(c) a list of the names  of members of the 
association that the association purports 
to represent and of the class and any 
category of office into which those 
members fall; and 
(d) an affidavit made by the person 
authorised by the executive of the 
association testifying that at t he date of 
the application – 
(i) no member of the association is a 
member of any other association; 
and 
(ii) the membership of the association 
comprises more than fifty per cent 
of the persons falling into the class 
that the association purports to 
represent. 
  



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 122 
Publication 
of 
application  
 177. The Minister shall within seven days of receipt 
of an application cause a notice to be published in the 
Gazette stating – 
(a) the date of the application, the name of 
the applicant association and the place 
where the d ocuments specified in 
regulation 176(2)(b) and (c) may be 
examined; and 
(b) that unless an association objects before 
the expiry of fourteen days from the date 
of the publication of the notice, the 
application shall be determined under 
section 34 of the Act. 
  
Objection 
to 
application  
 178.(1)   An association may object to an application 
by writing to the Minister before the expiry of fourteen days 
from the date of the publication of the notice referred to in 
regulation 177(b). 
(2) The grounds for an objection shall be – 
(a) that more than fifty per cent of the class 
that the applicant association purports to 
represent, are already represented by the 
objecting association; or 
(b) that the members of the application 
association are members of the objecting 
association. 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 123 
   (3) The Minister on receipt of those objections 
shall cause the applicant association to be informed in 
writing of the objection of the objecting association. 
   (4) The applicant association may respond to 
those objections in writing to the Mini ster no later than 
seven days of being so informed. 
  
Examinatio
n of 
records 
 179.(1)  Where an application is made, or where 
an objection is made to the Minister under regulation 
175(1), the Minister may require the applicant association 
or the objecting association to produce before the expiry of 
seven days of the date of the application or the objection, 
such books, records or other documents as he thinks fit. 
   (2) The Minister shall cause any books, records or 
other documents produced by an associat ion under sub -
regulation (1) to be examined in order to ascertain - 
(a) the membership of the association; and 
(b) which association is representative of 
more than fifty per cent of a class of 
officers. 
  
Decision of 
Minister 
 180. The Minister shall mak e his determination 
under section 34 of the Act no later than thirty days from 
the date of the notice referred to in regulation 178, and in 
so doing shall consider any objections or responses to 
those objections made under regulation 178(1). 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 124 
  
Public 
recognitio
n  
 181. The Minister, upon being satisfied that an 
association satisfies section 34 of the Act, shall cause a 
notice of recognition of that association as the appropriate 
recognised association to be published in the Gazette  
together with any withd rawal of recognition from an 
appropriate recognised association under section 34 of the 
Act, as may be necessary. 
Special 
duty leave 
and time 
off 
 182.(1) Subject to the exigencies of the Service, 
special duty leave with full pay up to fourteen days per year 
may be granted by the Commissioner to an officer who is 
required to attend a conference in or outside of the State 
as a delegate of an appropriate recognised association. 
 (2) Leave granted to an officer under sub -
regulation (1) shall not affect his en titlement to vacation 
leave. 
 (3) An officer who is a member of an appropriate 
recognised association and who is authorised to do 
business for that association shall be allowed time off to do 
such business by the Commissioner if the work of the 
Service would not be unduly affected.  
  (4) An application for leave or time off under this 
section shall, as far as practicable, be made well in 
advance of the commencement of such leave or time off.  
  
 PART XV - GRATUITIES AND PENSIONS 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 125 
  
Computati
on of 
gratuity, 
etc., a 
matter of 
high 
priority 
 183.(1)  The computation and authorisation of 
gratuities and pensions of officers whose retirement from 
the Service is known to be impending shall be treated as 
urgent matters of high priority. 
  (2) The Commissioner shall ensure that particulars 
of service and pay of all officers whose retirement is known 
to be imminent are furnished accurately to the Comptroller 
of Accounts not less than three months before the date on 
which the officers concerned are due to retire, i n order to 
enable the computation and checking of pensions, retiring 
allowances and gratuities to be completed by the 
Comptroller of Accounts and the Auditor General and 
submitted for authorisation before the date on which the 
officer's retirement from the Service is due to take effect. 
Contributio
n to 
superannu
ation 
allowances  
 184.(1) As a contribution towards the special 
superannuation allowances provided to officers, there shall 
be deducted from the pay of every officer a sum at such 
yearly rate as th e President from time to time directs, not 
being a greater rate than one and a quarter per cent; and 
all such sums shall be paid to the Comptroller of Accounts 
on or before the eighth day of every month. 
   (2) In the event of an officer leaving the Servic e by 
reason of dismissal without being eligible for a pension or 
gratuity under any written law, he is entitled to the return in 
full of all deductions made from his pay under sub -



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 126 
regulation (1), but the President may direct that any 
amount due to the Stat e in respect of any liability or 
defalcation be deducted from any amount so returnable. 
   (3) In addition to the contribution payable under 
sub-regulation (1), an officer shall, if the case so requires, 
pay arrears of contribution in respect of his full-time service 
as an officer or in a pensionable office in the Public Service 
or in respect of both. 
   (4) The arrears of contribution payable under sub -
regulation (3) shall be determined on the basis of the 
actual pay received by the officer for each year i n respect 
of which the arrears are payable and the aggregate 
amount thereof shall in the case of an officer who retires 
from the Service, be deducted from his pay, as far as 
practicable, by equal monthly instalments over a period of 
three years from the above- mentioned date or such lesser 
period, where the remainder of the service of the officer in 
the Service is less than three years, or from his gratuity, by 
lump sum, where any arrears of contribution are unpaid on 
the retirement of such officer. 
 
 
 
 
Chap. 
23:52 
Chap. 
35:50 
Chap. 
13:02 
   (5) In sub -regulation (3), "Public Service" has the 
same meaning as in the Pensions Act and includes service 
in the Fire Service established under the Fire Service Act, 
in the Prison Service established un der the Prison Service 
Act, and as a full -time member of the Special Reserve 
Police established by the Special Reserve Police Act. 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 127 
 
 
Chap. 
15:03 
  
Pension to 
officer in 
special 
cases   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 185.(1)  Subject to sub -regulation (2), an officer who 
is physically or mentally disabled may retire and, if he has 
completed ten years of satisfactory service, he may be 
granted a monthly pension not exceeding 1/480 th of a 
months pay for each completed month of service. 
   (2) A pension shall not be granted under sub -
regulation (1) unless it is stated in a certificate of a Medical 
Board that the officer to whom the certificate refers is 
incapable from infirmity of mind or body of performing the 
duties of his office and that such infirmity is likely to be 
permanent. 
  (3) Subject to this regulation, an officer who is not 
disabled, has attained the age of fifty years and has served 
in the Service for not less than ten years may be granted a 
monthly pension not exceeding 1/480th of a month's pay for 
each completed month of service.  
    (4) For the purpose of regulation 184(3) and sub -
regulation (3), a period of full-time service in a pensionable 
office in the Service shall be counted as service in the 
Service if it terminates not earlier than the day immediately 
preceding the commencement of service in the Service. 
   (5) In sub-regulation (4), "full -time service" means 
service remunerated at a monthly paid rate and includes 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 128 
any period of absence from duty on leave with full pay. 
   (6) The amount of any pension payable t o an 
officer under this regulation shall not exceed 85 per cent of 
his final pay for the year in which he retires, except that, in 
the case of an officer in the Second Division on the 1 st 
October 1973, who retires from the Service as an officer in 
the Seco nd Division, the percentage of final pay for the 
year in which he retires shall not exceed 92½ per cent. 
    (7) Where a period of service as an officer is or 
has been immediately followed by service in a pensionable 
office in another public service as de fined in the Pensions 
Act, such an officer, notwithstanding anything contained in 
sub-regulation (4), is entitled to a monthly pension under 
the Act not exceeding 1/480 th of a month's pay for each 
completed month of service if he has served in the Service 
for not less than ten years; and if he ultimately retires from 
that other public service at an age less than fifty years at 
which he is permitted by regulations of that service to retire 
with a pension, the pension which may be granted to him 
under the Act  shall be payable from the date of such 
retirement, notwithstanding that he shall not be fifty yeas of 
age. 
   (8) An officer may, if he has exercised his option 
as provided in sub -regulation (9) but not otherwise, be 
paid, in lieu of any pension for which  he is eligible, a 
pension at the rate of three -fourths of such pension 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 129 
together with a gratuity equal to twelve and one -half times 
the amount of the annual reduction so made in the 
pension. 
    (9) The option referred to in sub -regulation (8) 
shall be exe rcisable, and if it has been exercised may be 
revoked – 
(a) not later than one month after the 
retirement of the officer in case of a 
pension awarded under sub -regulation 
(1) or (2); and 
(b) not later than the day immediately 
preceding the date of his reti rement from 
another public service in the case of a 
pension awarded under sub -regulation 
(7), 
but the President may, if it appears to him equitable in all 
the circumstances to do so, allow such an officer to 
exercise the option or revoke an option previous ly 
exercised at any time between that date and the actual 
date of award of pension under the Act.  
    (10) The date of the exercise of the option by 
an officer under sub -regulation (8) is deemed to be the 
date of the receipt of his written notification ad dressed to 
the Commissioner. 
    (11) Subject to sub -regulation (8), if an officer 
has exercised the option his decision shall be irrevocable 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 130 
so far as concerns any pension to be granted to him under 
this regulation. 
   (12) Where an officer has not exerci sed the option 
and dies after his retirement but before a pension has been 
awarded under the Act, the President may grant a gratuity 
and a reduced pension as provided for in sub-regulation (9) 
as if the officer before his death had exercised the option. 
    (13) Nothing in this sub -regulation shall be 
construed to entitle an officer absolutely to any pension, or 
to prevent his being dismissed without pension, subject to 
sub-regulations (14) and (15), if such an officer to whom a 
pension has been granted un der the Act is sentenced to a 
term of imprisonment by a court in Trinidad and Tobago or 
elsewhere for any crime or offence, or quits Trinidad and 
Tobago after having reason to know that a charge of 
having committed any indictable or summary offence has 
been laid against him, and before such charge has been 
heard and determined, the President may direct that such 
pension shall immediately cease. 
    (14) An officer whose pension has ceased in 
pursuance of sub -regulation (13), and who at any time 
receives a pardon in respect of the offence for which he 
had been convicted, is entitled to have such pension 
restored to him with effect from the date on which it was 
ceased. 
   (15) The President may, where a pension ceases 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 131 
for the reasons set out in sub -regulation (13), cause all or 
any part of the moneys to which the pensioner would have 
been entitled by way of pension to be paid to or applied for 
the benefit of his wife or children or, after the expiration of 
his sentence, for his personal benefit in such proport ions 
and manner as the President thinks proper, and such 
moneys shall be paid or applied accordingly. 
  
Payments 
out of 
pensions 
 186.(1)  Where an order of maintenance is made 
against an officer to whom a pension has been granted 
under any written law, the President may, on its being 
proved to him that there is no reasonable probability of 
such order being satisfied, from time to time cause to be 
deducted from the moneys payable to such person such 
sum as the President may consider expedient and may 
cause the same to be applied to satisfy wholly or partly the 
said order. 
    (2) Where an officer to whom a pension has been 
granted has left Trinidad and Tobago and has deserted 
and left his wife or child in Trinidad and Tobago without 
sufficient means of su pport is, by reason of such officer‘s 
absence from Trinidad and Tobago, unable and would but 
for such absence be able to obtain an order of 
maintenance, the President may from time to time cause to 
be deducted from the moneys payable to such officer by 
way of pension such sum as the President may consider 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 132 
expedient and apply the same for the maintenance and 
support of such wife or child. 
  
Service for 
less than 
ten years 
 187.(1)   When an officer has been retired in 
accordance with regulation 185(1), and  regulation 185(2) 
has been satisfied, but such officer has not served in the 
Service for ten years, he may be granted by way of gratuity 
a sum not exceeding one-twelfth of a month's pay for each 
completed month of service. 
   (2) An officer who has served  in the Service for 
more than five years but less than ten years and who - 
(a) does not at the end of any period of 
enlistment or re-enlistment, re-enlist; or 
(b) is dismissed or has his services 
dispensed with, 
may be granted by way of gratuity such sums not 
exceeding one -twenty-fourth of a month's pay for each 
completed month of service.   
  
Broken 
service  
 
 188.(1)   No pension, gratuity or other allowance 
shall be granted in respect of a period of service that is 
broken by dismissal or removal. 
   (2) Service is not broken where it is interrupted by 
one or a combination of the following - 
(a) one day; 
(b) weekends;  



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 133 
(c) public holidays; 
(d) suspension; or 
(e) interdiction, where the outcome is 
favourable to the officer.  
  
Permanent  
injury 
 
 189.(1)  Subject to sub -regulation (2), when the 
President is satisfied that an officer has been permanently 
injured – 
(a) in the actual discharge of his duty; and 
(b) without his own default; and 
(c) by some injury specifically attributable to 
the nature of his duty, 
and his retirement is thereby nec essitated or accelerated, 
such an officer may be granted in respect of such injury, in 
addition to any pension or gratuity granted to him, an 
allowance in proportion to his injury of such monthly 
amount as the President may direct, not exceeding the 
following – 
 When his capacity to contribute to his support is – 
 Slightly impaired   1/12th of a month's salary 
 Impaired    1/6th of a month's salary 
 Materially impaired   1/4th of a month's salary 
 Totally destroyed   1/3rd of a month's salary 
    (2) An of ficer who is permanently injured while 
travelling by air in pursuance of official instructions is 
deemed to have been injured in the circumstances detailed 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 134 
in sub-regulation (1)(a) and (c) and in any such case, if the 
provisions of sub -regulation (1)(b) ar e also satisfied the 
rates of allowances shall be 1/8th, 1/4th , 3/8th and 1/2th of a 
month's pay respectively instead of the rates of allowance 
prescribed in sub-regulation (1). 
   (3)   The allowance referred to in sub-regulation (1) 
together with any pe nsion granted hereunder shall not 
exceed 5/6 th of a month's pay as at the date of injury and 
for the purposes of this sub -regulation any exercise of the 
option conferred by regulation 185(9) shall be ignored in 
calculating any such pension. 
   (4) The allowance referred to in sub -regulation (1) 
shall be less than the maximum specified in sub -regulation 
(3) by such amount as the President thinks reasonable in 
the following cases, namely - 
(a) where the injured officer has continued to 
serve for not less than  one year after the 
injury in respect of which he retires; 
(b) where the injured officer is forty -five or 
more years old  at the date of the injury; 
or 
(c) where the injury is not the sole cause of 
the retirement. 
    (5) Before granting an allowance unde r sub -
regulation (1) the President shall be furnished with the 
report of a Medical Board, so far as may be possible, on 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 135 
the matters relevant to his decision, and shall be guided by 
such report. 
   (6) If an injured officer has not qualified for any 
pension under this Act but is entitled to a gratuity under 
regulation 188 he may be granted, in lieu of such gratuity, 
a further allowance of such monthly sum, not exceeding 
one-twelfth of so many 480ths of a month's salary as is 
equal to the number of months he has actually served, as 
the President may direct. 
  
Pension to 
dependant 
of officer 
killed on 
duty and 
gratuity to 
spouse, 
etc. of  
officer who 
dies in the 
Service 
 
 190.(1)    If an officer dies as a result of injuries 
received – 
(a) in the actual discharge of his duty;  
(b) without his own default; and 
(c) on account of circumstances specifically 
attributable to the nature of his duty, 
while in the service of the Service, the President subject to 
sub-regulation (2), may grant, in addition to the grant, if 
any, made under regulation 189 (3) – 
(i) if the deceased officer leaves a spouse, a 
pension the spouse, while unmarried, 
according to such scale as may from time to 
time be fixed by the President; 
(ii) if the deceased officer leaves a spouse to 
whom a pension is granted und er 
subparagraph (i) and a child, a pension in 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 136 
respect of each child, until such child attains 
the age of eighteen years, of an amount not 
exceeding one -eighth of the pension payable 
under the subparagraph (i); 
(iii) if the deceased officer leaves a child, but do es 
not leave a spouse or no pension is granted to 
the spouse, a pension in respect of each child, 
until such child attains the age of eighteen 
years, of an amount not exceeding one quarter 
of the pension payable under subparagraph (i); 
(iv) if the deceased offi cer leaves a child and a 
spouse to whom a pension is granted under 
sub-paragraph (i), and the spouse 
subsequently dies, a pension in respect of each 
child, as from the date of the death of the 
spouse until such child attains the age of 
eighteen years, of a n amount not exceeding 
one quarter of the pension payable under sub -
paragraph (i); 
(v) if the deceased officer does not leave a 
spouse, or if no pension is granted to his 
spouse and if his mother was wholly or mainly 
dependent on him for her support, a pension  to 
the mother, whilst she is without adequate 
means of support, of an amount not exceeding 
the pension which might have been granted to 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 137 
his spouse. 
    (2) A pension shall not be payable under sub -
regulation (1) at any time in respect of more than six 
children, and where there are more than six children in 
respect of whom, but for this sub -regulation, a pension 
would be payable, then the amount payable in respect of 
six children shall be divided equally among all such 
children during the period in which t here are more than six 
children of pensionable age. 
   (3) In the case of a pension granted under sub -
regulation (1)(v), if the mother is a widow at the time of the 
grant of such pension and subsequently remarries, such 
pension shall cease as from the date  of the remarriage; 
and if it appears to the President at any time that the 
mother is adequately provided with other means of 
support, such pension shall cease as from such date as 
the President may determine. 
    (4) A pension granted to a female child u nder sub-
regulation (1) shall cease upon the marriage of such child 
under the age of eighteen years. 
   (5) For the purpose of sub -regulation (1), the word 
"child" includes - 
(a) a posthumous child; 
(b) a step-child  born before the date of the 
injury and wholly o r mainly dependent 
upon the deceased officer for support; 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 138 
and 
(c) an adopted child, adopted in the manner 
recognised by law, before the date of the 
injury, and wholly or mainly dependent 
upon the deceased officer for support. 
   (6) An officer who dies as a re sult of injuries 
received while travelling by air in pursuance of official 
instructions is deemed to have died in the circumstances 
mentioned in sub-regulation (1)(a) and (c). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   (7) If an officer dies while in the Serv ice, the 
President may grant to his spouse or to his children or to 
any of his dependant a gratuity of an amount not 
exceeding one year's salary of such officer, or his 
commuted pension gratuity, if any, whichever is the 
greater. 
    (8) Where an officer, to whom either an unreduced 
pension or a gratuity and reduced pension has been 
granted, dies after retirement from the Service, and the 
sums paid or payable to him at his death on account of 
such unreduced pension, or gratuity and reduced pension 
as the ca se may be, are less than the amount of the 
annual salary enjoyed by him at the date of his retirement, 
the President may grant to his spouse or to his children or 
to any of his dependant a gratuity equal to the deficiency. 
    (9) For the purpose of sub-regulations (7) and (8) - 
"commuted pension gratuity" means the gratuity, if 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 139 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
any, calculated in the manner prescribed in 
regulation 181, which might have been granted to 
the officer if he had retired immediately before his 
death in circumstances rendering hi m eligible to 
receive a gratuity and reduced pension instead of 
an unreduced pension; 
"dependant' means a spouse, child including an 
adopted child and a child of the family, parent, 
grandparent, step -parent, brother, sister, half -
brother, half-sister, or a person who stood in loco 
parentis to the deceased officer whether related 
to him by consanguinity or not. 
  
 PART XVI – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
  
Communic
ation to 
Commissio
ner 
 191.(1)   Any communication that an officer wishes to 
address to the Comm issioner shall be forwarded through 
the senior officer under whom he is serving. 
   (2) The senior officer in forwarding a 
communication from a junior officer is expected to 
comment and give advice on the questions dealt with in 
such communication. 
  
  
Official 
communic
ation 
 192. An official communication that an officer wishes 
to address to a Government Official or Department shall be 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 140 
forwarded to the Commissioner through the senior officer 
under whom he is serving. 
  
Orders  193.(1) Orders may be is sued to officers as 
follows: 
(a) Standing Orders, by the Commissioner; 
(b) Service Orders, by the Commissioner; 
(c) Divisional or Branch Orders, by officers in 
charge of such Divisions or Branches. 
  (2) The Commissioner may appoint a committee to 
advise him on the issue of Standing Orders. 
 (3) The appropriate recognised association shall 
be invited by the Commissioner to nominate 
representatives to serve on a committee appointed under 
sub-regulation (2). 
  
Standing 
Orders 
with 
respect to 
books and 
other 
records 
 194. The Commissioner may issue Standing Orders 
to the Service setting out the books and other records to be 
kept at Divisions, Branches, Stations or other 
Administrative or  Operational Units of the Service, the 
manner in which such books or other records a re to be 
kept, and how they should be disposed of. 
  
Correction
s 
 195. No erasures shall be made in any official book 
or document but mistakes shall be crossed out and 
initialled, except in the case of corrections in a Station 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 141 
Diary which shall be made b y the recording of a new entry 
correcting the original entry. 
  
Circulation 
of orders 
 196.(1) The Commissioner shall bring all orders, 
regulations and other official publications affecting officers 
to their attention. 
   (2) The Commissioner shall circu late the Gazette 
for the information of all officers. 
  
Pocket 
diary 
 197.(1) An officer shall have in his possession his 
pocket diary at all times. 
 (2) An officer shall record in his pocket diary only 
all entries in relation to his duties.  
  
Legal aid  198. Where an officer, who is charged other than by 
the police with a criminal offence arising out of or in the 
course of the execution of his duty, seeks legal aid in the 
conduct of his defence, the Commissioner, if satisfied that 
the officer acted in  good faith in the execution of his duty, 
shall so report to the Attorney General who shall decide 
whether the officer shall be granted legal aid. 
  
Change of 
name 
 199. An officer shall inform the Commissioner in 
writing when he changes his name and sha ll submit 
documentary evidence of that fact as soon as possible.  
  



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 142 
Saluting  200.(1) An officer of the First Division shall salute his 
seniors in rank. 
       (2) An officer of the Second Division shall 
salute an officer of the First Division. 
     (3) An officer shall salute such designated persons 
on such occasions as the Commissioner may direct. 
  
Register of 
found 
property 
 201. A record shall be kept in a register of all found 
property in such manner as the Commissioner may direct. 
  
Establishm
ent of 
Messes 
 202.(1)  A Mess may be established at any Police 
Station or Police Training Academy for the use and 
convenience of the personnel of such Station or Academy. 
 (2)  All cooking utensils, wares, stoves and other 
messing facilities shall be supplied out of public funds.  
  
Administra
tion of 
Messes 
 203. The responsibility for the efficient 
administration of all Messes shall rest with the 
Commissioner who shall issue instructions for their 
operation. 
  
First 
Division 
Officers' 
Mess 
 204.(1)  E very officer in the First Division shall be a 
member of the First Division Officers' Mess of which the 
Commissioner shall be President. 
 (2) The entrance fee for membership of the First 
Division Officers' Mess as well as the annual subscription 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 143 
to be paid for such membership shall be determined at the 
General Mess Meeting to be held in January of each year. 
 (3) The Mess shall be managed by a Management 
Committee that shall consist of a Deputy Commissioner as 
Chairman, the Mess Secretary as the Secretary an d three 
other members to be elected annually at the General Mess 
Meeting. 
(4) The Management Committee shall appoint a 
member to the Committee to act in the place of any 
Committee member who may be absent on duty or leave. 
  (5) The Commissioner shall app oint a member of 
the Mess to be Mess Secretary who shall keep all 
accounts, books and records relating to the management 
and operation of the Mess, and shall perform such duties 
as the Management Committee may direct. 
 (6) No entries shall be made in the M ess Fund 
Book other than those concerned with the furnishing and 
general up -keep of the Mess and the payment of 
attendants. 
 (7) The annual contribution voted by the 
Parliament shall be paid into the Mess Fund. 
 (8) Rules for the general management of the Mess 
shall be -   
(a) made at the annual General Mess 
Meeting or at any other General Mess 
Meeting called for the purpose; 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 144 
(b)  subject to the approval of the 
Commissioner; and 
(c)  binding on all members of the Mess. 
  
Inspectors’ 
and 
Sergeants’ 
Mess 
 205.(1)  Every Inspector and Sergeant shall be a 
member of the Inspectors‘ and Sergeants‘ Mess of which 
the Commissioner shall be President. 
 (2) The entrance fee for membership of the 
Inspectors‘ and Sergeants‘ Mess as well as the annual 
subscription to be  paid for such membership shall be 
determined at the General Mess Meeting to be held in 
January of each year. 
 (3) The Mess shall be managed by a Management 
Committee, the composition of which shall be determined 
by the appropriate recognised association a nd the 
Commissioner. 
 (4) The Management Committee shall appoint a 
member to the Committee to act in the place of any 
Committee member who may be absent on duty or leave. 
  (5) The Commissioner shall appoint a member of 
the Mess to be Mess Secretary who s hall be Secretary of 
the Management Committee and shall keep all accounts, 
books and relating to the management and operation of the 
Mess, and shall perform such other duties as the 
Management Committee may direct. 
 (6) No entries shall be made in the Mess  Fund 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 145 
Book other than those concerned with the furnishing and 
general up -keep of the Mess and the payment of 
attendants.  
  (7) The annual contribution voted by Parliament 
shall be paid into the Mess Fund. 
 (8)   Rules for the general management of the Me ss 
shall be -   
(a) made at the annual General Mess 
Meeting or at any other General Mess 
Meeting called for the purpose; 
(b)  subject to the approval of the 
Commissioner; and 
  (c)  binding on all members of the Mess. 
  
Other 
Ranks’ 
Mess 
 206.(1)  Every other officer in the Second Division 
shall be a member of the Other Ranks‘ Mess of which the 
Commissioner shall be President. 
 (2) The entrance fee for membership of the Other 
Ranks‘ Mess as well as the annual subscription to be paid 
for such membership sh all be determined at the General 
Mess Meeting to be held in January of each year. 
 (3) The Mess shall be managed by a Management 
Committee, the composition of which shall be determined 
by the appropriate recognised association and the 
Commissioner. 
 (4) The Management Committee shall appoint a 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 146 
member to the Committee to act in the place of any 
Committee member who may be absent on duty or leave. 
  (5) The Commissioner shall appoint a member of 
the Mess to be Mess Secretary who shall be Secretary of 
the Man agement Committee and shall keep all accounts, 
books and relating to the management and operation of the 
Mess, and shall perform such other duties as the 
Management Committee may direct. 
 (6) No entries shall be made in the Mess Fund 
Book other than those concerned with the furnishing and 
general up -keep of the Mess and the payment of 
attendants.  
  (7) The annual contribution voted by Parliament 
shall be paid into the Mess Fund. 
 (8)   Rules for the general management of the Mess 
shall be -   
(a) made at the annual General Mess 
Meeting or at any other General Mess 
Meeting called for the purpose; 
(b)  subject to the approval of the 
Commissioner; and 
  (c)  binding on all members of the Mess. 
  
Sports 
Club 
 207.(1)  There shall be a Police Sports Club of w hich 
every officer and trainee shall be a member and of which 
the Commissioner shall be President. 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 147 
 (2) The Sports Club shall be managed by a 
committee (―the Management Committee‖) to be elected 
annually by the members and approved by the 
Commissioner. 
 (3) The Management Committee shall submit 
annually to the Commissioner an audited financial 
statement of the Sports Club. 
 (4) Members shall pay a subscription to be fixed by 
the Commissioner after consultation with the Management 
Committee. 
 (5) Rules for t he general management of the 
Sports Club shall be -   
(a) made at the annual General Meeting or at 
any other general meeting called for the 
purpose; 
(b)  subject to the approval of the 
Commissioner; and 
  (c)  binding on all members of the Club. 
  
Police 
Band 
 208. A member of the Police Band shall not 
participate as a player at any public or private 
entertainment except with the written permission of the 
Commissioner. 
 
 
 
Police 
Band to 
play with 
 209.(1)   The Police Band or part of the Band  may, 
with the written permission of the Commissioner, play at 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 148 
permission any entertainment. 
 (2) Fees shall be charged for playing at such 
entertainment at such rates as may be approved by the 
Commissioner. 
 (3) Fees paid under sub -regulation (2) shall be 
paid in ad vance and eighty percent of it shall be divided 
amongst members of the Band playing at such 
entertainment in such proportion as the Commissioner 
shall direct and the remainder shall be paid into the Award 
Fund. 
  
Applicatio
n of 
regulations 
 210.  These r egulations shall apply to every officer, 
whether the officer is appointed to an office in the Service 
for an indeterminate period, on probation or on contract. 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 149 
Regulations 4(1) and 6(1) 
 
APPENDIX A 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
            TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO POLICE SERVICE 
 
      
    APPLICATION FOR TRAINEE / BAND 
 APPRENTICE  
 
 
 
1. SURNAME____________________FIRST 
NAMES_______________________ 
 
  Other names known by (if any) 
_____________________________________ 
 
 
2. Present 
Address___________________________________________
________ 
 
 __________________________________________________
_____________ 
 
 
3. Home Address (if different from 
2)_____________________________________ 
 
 __________________________________________________
_____________ 
 
 
 
Attach recent 
passport size 
photograph 
 
 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 150 
 
4. Full Postal 
Address___________________________________________
______ 
 
 __________________________________________________
____________ 
 
 
5. Telephone 
Number_______________________________________________ 
 
6. State full address or addresses at which you have resided over 
the last five (5) years: 
 
Address Time 
 
 
 
From 
 
To 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 151 
 
7. Date of 
Birth___________________________________________________
___ 
 
 
8. Citizenship__________________________________________
_____________ 
 
 
9. (a) Father's Name_______________ 
Nationality______________________ 
 
 (b) Mother's Name_______________ 
Nationality_____________________ 
 
 
10. What is: 
 
(a) Your 
Occupation_________________________________________
__ 
 
(b) Your Father's 
Occupation____________________________________ 
 
(c) Father‘s Present 
Address_____________________________________ 
 
(d) Your Mother's 
Occupation___________________________________ 
 
(e) Mother‘s Present 
Address___________________________________ 
 
11. State below, in order of date, the schools you have attended: 
 
 
 DATE OF  Particulars of 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 152 
 
Name of School 
 
Entry 
 
Leaving 
 
Age of 
Leaving 
Scholarships 
etc. and 
whether 
School 
Prefect etc. 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
 
12. Academic or other Qualifications including musical ability, 
Certificates etc. (G.C.E., 'O' and 'A' Levels, etc.) 
 
 __________________________________________________
______________ 
 
 __________________________________________________
______________ 
 
13. Languages 
spoken____________________________________________
____ 
 
 
14. Give details of your employment since leaving school: 
 
 
Name and 
address of 
employer 
Capacity in 
which 
employed 
DATES 
EMPLOYED 
Reason for 
leaving 
  From To  
    



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 153 
    
    
 
 
 15. (a) Are you the holder of a driving 
permit?____________________________ 
 
 (b) If so, state date of 
issue________________________________________ 
  
 (c) Types and classes of vehicles you are permitted to 
 drive:_________________________________________
___ 
   (d) Driving Permit 
number________________________________________ 
 
 
 16. Give details of any special 
skills_____________________________________ 
 
   
 ____________________________________________________________
____ 
 
   
 ____________________________________________________________
____ 
 
 
17. Married/ Single ______________If married, state Spouse's 
Name and Address: 
 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 154 
 
 __________________________________________________
_____________ 
 
 
 __________________________________________________
______________ 
 
18. Number and ages of 
children________________________________________ 
 
 
19. State your height (in bare feet) in (cm) and weight in (kg)     
__________________________________________________
______________ 
 
20. Details of any sports or other extra curricular activities in which 
you take part, and at what level: 
 
 _______________________________________________________
_________ 
 
 
 21. Have you ever been charged with or summone d before a court 
for any  offence? 
 
   
 ____________________________________________________________
___ 
 
  If so, give particulars of offence, date, place, court and result: 
 
__________________________________________________
______________ 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 155 
__________________________________________________
______________ 
__________________________________________________
______________ 
22. Give names and addresses of two citizens (not relatives) who 
have  known          you for not less than five (5) years, and to 
whom reference may be made: 
 
 
 
Name 
 
Address 
 
Occupation 
PERIOD OF 
KNOWLEDGE OF 
CANDIDATE 
   From To 
 
 
    
 
 
    
 
 
    
 
 
23. Attach at least (2) testimonials from persons other than those 
mentioned at (22)  above. 
 
 
 
I hereby declare that all the above statement s made by me are true 
and correct to the best of my knowledge and belief. 
 
 
 
 
Date______________________ Signature of 
Applicant_______________________ 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 156 
 
 
 
 
N.B.: Applications must be submitted to the Officer in Charge 
of the Police Station nearest to which the applicant 
resides. 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 157 
Regulation 13 
 
APPENNDIX B 
 
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO POLICE SERVICE 
 
PROBATIONER’S ASSESSMENT 
 
Number: ………………………………..  Date Enlisted: ……………………………. 
Name: ……..…………………………… 
 
ASSESSMENT 
 
 Unsat
is- 
factor
y 
Improv
e- 
ment 
Requir
ed 
Satis- 
factor
y 
Above 
Avera
ge 
Out- 
standi
ng 
1. Has he/she shown 
sustained interest in 
his/her duties? 
     
2. Industry: Does he/she do 
his/her full share of 
work? 
     
3. Performance: Has his/her 
work been generally of 
good standard? 
     
4. Is he/she clear and 
precise in his/her speech 
and writing? 
     
5. Has he/she been 
reasonable in dealing 
with reports and applying 
the law? 
     
6. He/she has been found 
wanting in his/her 
behaviour towards the 
public? 
     



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 158 
7. Is he/she amendable to 
discipline? 
     
8. Is hi s/her appearance 
and turnout always of 
good standard? 
     
9. Can he/she be depended 
upon to perform duties 
within his/her 
competence without 
direct supervision? 
     
1
0. 
Punctuality.      
1
1. 
Absent from duty.      
1
2 
Does he/she have 
personal problem s, 
domestic, financial or 
otherwise? 
     
 
General remarks of Appraiser: 
………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………… 
 
 
 
Rank:………………………………….. 
 …………………………………   
 ……………………………… 
  Signature      Date 
 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 159 
 
 
 
Remarks of Officer in Charge of Division: 
………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………… 
 
 
 
Rank: ………………………………… 
 ……………………………….  
 ……………………………… 
  Signature      Date 
 
 
Regulation 121 
 
APPENDIX C 
 
FIRST DIVISION OFFICERS’ UNIFORM 
AND ORDERS OF DRESS 
 
Badges of Rank - Silver-plated, Service pattern on dark blue 
background. 
 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 160 
Belt, Sam Brown – with pouch and holster in brow n leather with 
silver-plated fittings.  
 
Beret – Dark blue cloth, Officers' pattern, silver -plated Service badge 
at left front. 
Boots and Shoes – 
(a) Black Wellington parade; 
(b) Black top riding boots; 
(c) Brown leather shoes, plain toe-cap; 
(d) Black patent leather shoes, no toe-cap; 
(e) Black leather shoes, plain toecap for female police officers. 
 
Bush Tunic – Khaki garnaline, single breasted, four buttons and 
eyelets button stand cut on, open shirt collar with miniature Service 
Badges or Gorgets, two breast pockets, with 11/2 inch pleat down 
centre, three-pointed flaps, two service pattern bottom pockets, whole 
back with vent to waist seam, separate self-cloth belt, short sleeves 1 
1/2 inch permanent turn -ups, shoulder straps extending to collar 
stand, badges of rank on shoulder straps.  
 
Buttons – Silver-plated with Service badge. 
 
Cross Belt and Pouch – Black Morocco leather as worn by Rifle 
Regiments, with silver-plated chains, and silver-plated Service badge 
in front of belt and in centre of pouch. 
 
Cummerbund, Mess – Dark blue silk, 5 1/2  inches in front, fitted with 
dark black leather strap and buckle. 
Cap – Dark blue Regulation for female police officers.  



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 161 
Forage Cap – Guards' pattern, dark blue, black oak leaf lace band, 
silver-plated Service badge in front, and bla ck patent leather 
chinstrap. Two rows of oak leaf silver lace on peak for the 
Commissioner; one row of oak leaf silver lace on peak for the Deputy 
Commissioner and Assistant Commissioner; ¾ inch silver wire lace 
on black patent leather peak for Senior Supe rintendent and 
Superintendent; plain black patent leather peak for Assistant 
Superintendent.  
 
Gloves -  Brown leather. 
 
Gloves – White. 
 
Gorgets – 
Commissioner: Silver embroidered oak leaf with three acorns down 
centre of dark blue cloth.  Size: Length – 33/4 inches to point; Width: 
13/4 inches; one small silver-plated Service button. 
Deputy Commissioner: As above, but silver ornament of twisted ¼ 
inch silver braid. 
Assistant Commissioner: As above, but silver ornament of ¼ inch 
tracing braid. 
 
Hose tops – Dark blue. 
 
Lanyard and Whistle – Dark blue silk cord, 36 inches double, with 
Metropolitan Police pattern whistle.  
 
Mess Jacket – Plain white Eton jacket with miniature silver -plated 
Service badge on dark blue mount on each lapel, dark blue 
detachable shoulder straps, miniature silver-plated badges of rank.  



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 162 
 
Overalls – Dark blue cloth with 1 ¾ inches black overleaf braid down 
sides, black leather tabs to button or buckle under Wellington boots.  
 
Riding Breaches – Dark blue cloth with black buckskin strappings and 
1 ¾ inches black oak leaf braid down sides, split falls, cross pockets, 
laced, boot button at back, seam across the knee. 
 
Satchels – Black and brown leather for female police officers. 
 
Sashes – Dark blue with tassels. 
Shirt – White, soft. 
Shirt – White, hard front evening, detached collar, black studs and 
links with silver-plated border. 
 
Shirt – White, soft evening, attached or detached double collar, polo 
shape, plain white buttons. 
Shorts – Khaki Garnaline, fly front, side pockets, waistband  all round, 
3 ¾ inches deep with four pleats.  
 
Skirts – Dark blue serge. 
 
Skirts – Khaki Garberdine. 
 
Skirts – Khaki Garnaline. 
 
Socks – Dark blue for service dress, black for Mess kit. 
 
Stockings – Khaki. 
 
Stockings – Black and flesh colour (ladies). 
 
Spurs, box – Silver-plated, swan neck. 
 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 163 
Spurs, riding – Short-necked, silver-plated with chains, black leather 
guards and straps. 
 
Sword belt and Slings – In black Morocco leather, black web belt with 
silver-plated buckles. 
  
Sword – Infantry pattern – hilt and scabbard to be plated. 
 
Sword Knot – Silver strap and acorn. 
 
Tie – Black evening bow, square ends. 
 
Tie – Silk poplin, dark blue, open ends, length 45 inches. 
 
Trousers (Mess) – Black cloth, modified to pattern of Regulation Navy 
Mess Kit trousers, black oak leaf braid down sides. 
Trousers (Slacks) – Khaki Garnaline with two side pockets. 
 
Tunic, White Drill – Shoulder straps of the same material to fasten 
with one small Service button, stand -up collar to fasten with two 
hooks, five large Service buttons in front, outside pockets on breast of 
coat with flaps to button with small Service buttons 1 ½ inch fold of 
cloth down to the centre of the breast pockets, V -shaped cuffs, sides 
of tunic to be split 4 inches, badges of rank on shoulder straps; 
gorgets, dark blue detachable shoulder straps and lanyards for the 
Commissioner, Deputy Commissioner and Assistant Commissioner 
and miniature Service Badges for other First Division Officers. 
 
Tunic, Service Pattern – Khaki gaberdine (dark blue serge for female 
police officers), with breast and side pockets, Service badge on upper 
part of lapel, four large Service buttons in front, small Service buttons 
for shoulder straps, breast pockets and side pockets, badges of rank 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 164 
on shoulder straps, self -cloth belt with sil ver-plated buckle, 
detachable silver-plated waist books; gorgets for the Commissioner, 
Deputy Commissioner and Assistant Commissioner. 
 
Waterproof – Khaki, regulation pattern. 
 
ORDERS OF DRESS 
 
(i)  Full Dress: 
 Forage Cap, white tunic, cross belt and pouc h, sword and 
plated scabbard, sword belt and slings, silver sword knot, medals 
and/or decorations (if any), overalls, Wellington boots, box spurs, 
white gloves; gorgets, dark blue detachable shoulder straps, lanyards 
and sashes for the Commissioner, Deputy  Commissioner, and 
Assistant Commissioner.  Dark blue Service pattern Tunic belt and 
skirt, black stockings, black leather shoes, white soft shirt and navy 
blue tie for female police officers. 
 
 When Mounted: Dark blue riding breeches, black top boots, 
spurs and chains, black leather guards.  
 
(ii)  Service Dress: 
 Forage Cap, khaki gaberdine service tunic, white shirt, blue tie, 
Sam Browne belt or self -cloth belt, khaki gaberdine trousers, blue 
socks, brown leather shoes, lanyard and whistle; gorgets for t he 
Commissioner, Deputy Commissioner and Assistant Commissioner.  
Khaki gaberdine skirt and flesh colour stocking for female police 
officers.  



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 165 
 
When Mounted: Dark blue riding breeches, black top boots, spurs 
and chains, black leather guards.  
 
(iii) Patrol Dress: 
 Forage Cap or beret, khaki garnaline bush tunic or khaki shirt 
with self -cloth belt or stable belt and silver -plated buckle or Sam 
Browne belt, khaki garnaline trousers, brown shoes, lanyard and 
whistle.  Khaki garnaline skirt and flesh colour sto ckings for female 
police officers.  
 
 When Mounted:  Dark blue riding breeches, black top boots, 
spurs and chains, black leather guards.  
 
(iv) Mess Dress: 
 Forage Caps, white Mess Jacket, cummerbund, miniature 
medals, overalls or Mess trousers, black socks , black Wellington 
boots with box spurs or black patent leather shoes, hard front or soft 
evening shirt, black bow tie and white gloves. Dark blue regulation 
cap, dark blue serge skirt, black stockings and black leather shoes for 
female police officers. 
 
(v)   Tactical Dress 
 Long sleeve khaki garnaline shirt, with ―Police‖ on the back, 
khaki garnaline pants with cargo pockets, nylon belt with hook type 
buckle, black military boots or operational type, peak cap with ―Police‖ 
on front, the name of the tactic al unit to be worn on top right of shirt 
pocket.  



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 166 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 167 
          Regulation 
121 
 
APPENDIX D 
 
SECOND DIVISION OFFICERS’ UNIFORM 
AND ORDERS OF DRESS 
 
INSPECTORS 
 
 
Badges of Rank – Silver-plated bars 1.6 inches by 0.3 inches. 
 
Belt, Sam Browne – With pouch and holster, in brown leather with 
silver-plated fittings. 
 
Boots and Shoes – 
 
(a) Black Wellington parade; 
(b) Black top riding boots; 
(c) Brown leather shoes, plain toe-cap;  
(d) Black patent leather shoes, no toe-cap; 
(e) Black leather shoes, plain toecap for female police  
officers. 
 
Bush Tunic – Khaki garnaline drill, single breasted, four buttons and 
eyelets, button stand out on, open shirt collar, with miniature Service 
badges, two breast pockets with 1 ½ inch pleat down centre, three 
pointed flaps, two service pattern b ottom pockets, whole back with 
vent to waist seam; separate self-cloth belt, short sleeves, 1 ½ inches 
permanent turn -ups, shoulder straps extending to collar stand, 
badges of rank on shoulder straps. 
 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 168 
Buttons – Silver-plated with Service badge. 
 
Cross Bel t and Pouch – Black Morocco leather as sworn by Rifle 
Regiment, with silver -plated chains, and silver -plated Service badge 
in front of belt and in centre of pouch. 
 
Cummerbund – Dark blue silk, 5 ½ inches in front, fitted with black 
leather strap and buckle. 
 
Cap – Dark blue regulation for female police officers. 
 
Forage Cap – Guards' pattern, dark blue, black oak leaf lace band, 
silver-plated Service badge in front, black patent leather, chinstrap. 
Two rows of oak leaf silver lace on peak for the Commissio ner; one 
row of oak leaf silver lace on peak for the Deputy Commissioner and 
Assistant Commissioner; ¾ inch silver wire lace on black patent 
leather peak for Senior Superintendent and Superintendent; plain 
black patent leather peak for Assistant Superintendent. 
 
Gloves – White. 
 
Helmet, white – Wolseley pattern, cork, with 8 -fold white puggaree, 
silver-plated spike and chain, silver -plated Service badge in front; 4 -
inch hackle of blue and white vulture feathers, white inside, to be 
worn at the left side secured by puggaree. 
 
Hose tops – Dark blue. 
 
Lanyard and Whistle – Dark blue silk cord, 36 inches double, with 
Metropolitan Police pattern whistle. 
 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 169 
Mess Jacket – White drill shell jacket with miniature silver -plated 
Service badge on dark blue cloth mount on each lapel, plain shoulder 
straps, and miniature silver-plated badges of rank. 
 
Overalls – Dark blue cloth with 1 ¾ inch black oak leaf braid down 
sides, black leather tabs to button or buckle under Wellington boots.  
 
Riding Breeches – Dark blue with self strappings. 
 
Satchels – Black leather for female police officers. 
 
Shirt – White, soft evenings, attached or detached double collar, polo 
shape, plain white buttons. 
 
Shorts – Khaki garnaline, fly front, side pockets, waistband all round 3 
¾ inches deep with four pleats. 
 
Skirts – Dark blue Serge. 
 
Skirts – Khaki garberdine 
 
Socks – Dark blue for Service dress, black for Mess kit. 
 
Spurs, Riding – Short-necked, silver-plated with chains, black leather 
guards and straps. 
 
Stockings – Khaki. 
 
Stockings – Black and flesh colour (ladies). 
 
Sword Belt and Slings – In black Morocco leather, black web belt with 
silver-plated buckles. 
Sword – Infantry pattern; hilt and scabbard to be plated. 
 
Sword Knot – Silver strap and acorn. 
 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 170 
Tie – Silk poplin, dark blue, open ends, length 45 inches. 
 
Trousers (Mess) – Black cloth, modified to pattern of Regulation Navy 
Mess kit trousers, black oak leaf braid down sides. 
 
Trousers (Slacks) – Khaki garnaline with two side pockets. 
 
Trousers (Slacks) – Khaki gaberdine with two side pockets. 
 
Tunic, Service pattern – Khaki gaberdine (Dark blue serge for female 
police officers), with breast and side pockets. Service badge on upper 
part of lapel, four large Service buttons in front, small Service buttons 
for shoulder straps, breast p ockets and side pockets, badges of rank 
on shoulder straps; self -cloth belt with silver -plated buckle, 
detachable silver-plated waist hook. 
 
Tunic, White Drill  – Shoulder straps of the same material to fasten 
with one small Service button, stand -up collar to fasten with two 
hooks five large Service buttons in front, outside pocket on breast of 
coat with flaps to button with small Service buttons, a 1½ inch fold of 
cloth down the centre of the breast pockets, V -shaped cuffs, sides of 
tunic to be split 4 inches, badges of rank on shoulder straps. 
 
Waterproof – Khaki regulation pattern. 
 
 
ORDERS OF DRESS 
 
(i) Review Order: 
White helmet, white tunic, cross belt and pouch, sword and 
plated scabbard, sword belt and slings, silver sword knot, medals 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 171 
and/or decorations (if any), overalls, Wellington boots, white gloves, 
dark blue regulation cap, service pattern tunic and skirt, White shirt, 
dark blue tie, black stockings and black leather shoes for female 
police officers. 
     When Mounted: Dark blue riding breaches, black top boots, spurs, 
and chains, black leather guards. 
(ii) Service Dress 
Forage cap, khaki gaberdine service tunic, white collar and 
shirt, blue tie, Sam Browne belt with one strap or self -cloth belt, khaki 
trousers, blue socks, brown leather shoes, lanyard and whistle. Khaki 
gaberdine skirt and flesh colour stockings for female police officers. 
When Mounted:  Dark blue riding breeches, black top boots, spurs, 
black leather guards. 
 
(iii) Patrol Dress: 
Forage cap, khaki garnaline bush tunic with self -cloth belt an d 
silver-plated buckle for Sam Browne with one strap, khaki garnaline 
trousers, brown shoes, lanyard and whistle. Khaki garnaline skirt and 
flesh colour stockings for female police officers. 
 When Mounted : Dark blue riding breeches, black stop boots, 
spurs, black leather guards. 
 
(iv) Mess Dress:  
Forage cap, white Mess jacket, cummerbunds, miniature 
medals, Mess trousers, black socks, black patent leather shoes, soft 
evening shirt, black bow tie and dark blue regulation cap. Dark blue 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 172 
serge skirt, black stockin gs and black leather shoe for female police 
officers. 
 
 
 
(v)   Tactical Dress 
 Long sleeve khaki garnaline shirt, with ―Police‖ on the back, 
khaki garnaline pants with cargo pockets, nylon belt with hook type 
buckle, black military boots or operational type, peak cap with ―Police‖ 
on front, the name of the tactical unit to be worn on top right of shirt 
pocket.  
 
SERGEANTS, CORPORALS AND CONSTABLES 
 
Aiguillette – Blue, white metal ends. 
Badges of Rank – Silver lace. 
Badges of Appointment – As above. 
Badges for Skill – As above. 
Belt – Waist – White buff, "ER" cypher, "Trinidad Police", adjustable 
buckle and claps in white metal. 
 
Belt – Waist – Brown leather 
 
Belt – Waist – Black leather with silver-plated buckle for female police 
officers. 
 
Boots: 
(a) Ankle, black leather; 
(b) Jack boots, black leather. 
 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 173 
Bush Tunic – Dark blue garnaline, single breasted, four buttons and 
eyelets, button stand cut on, open shirt collar, two breast pockets 1½ 
inch pleats down centre, three pointed flaps, two service pattern 
bottom pockets, whole back with vent to waist seam, short sleeves 
1½ inch permanent turn -ups, shoulder straps extending to collar 
stand for female police officers. 
 
Buttons – White metal, with Service badge. 
 
Cane – Regulation, 2 ½ feet long by 1 ½ inches in circumfe rence. 
Police badge on white metal head. 
 
Canvass Shoes – White. 
 
Canvass Shoes – Black. 
 
Cap – Blue, Navy pattern with ribbon "Trinidad and Tobago Police 
Service: in gold letters. 
 
Cap – Dark blue regulation for female police officers. 
 
Cap – White, duck,  Navy pattern with ribbon "Trinidad and Tobago 
Police Service" in gold letters. 
 
Cloak – Black waterproof, regulation pattern with sleeves. 
 
Crowns – White metal. 
 
Crowns – Silver lace. 
 
Duty Badge – Blue and white. 
 
Forage Cap – Universal pattern indigo b lue cloth and small Service 
badge in front. 
 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 174 
Forage Cap – As above but with white cord in crown seam. 
 
Girdle – As used by Lancer Regiments. 
 
Helmet – White – Wolseley pattern, cork, leather chinstrap, and large 
Service badge in front. Spike and chain for Review Order. White 
puggaree for the Band. 
 
Helmet – Khaki – Wolseley pattern, cork, leather chinstrap, with large 
Service badge in front. 
 
Hooks for belt – Brass. 
 
Hose tops – Blue. 
 
Jersey – Blue with word "Police". 
 
Jumper – Serge – Navy pattern, red piping around armholes. 
 
Jumper – White Drill – Navy pattern, detachable blue and white 
collar, blue and white cuffs. 
 
Kit Box – Wooden, Regulation. 
Knife – Claps. 
 
Lanyard – White, for knife. 
 
Lanyard and Whistle  - Dark blue silk cord, 36 inches double with  
Metropolitan Police pattern whistle. 
 
Neckerchief – Black Silk.  
 
Numerals – White metal. 
 
Plastron – Tunic as worn by Lancer Regiments. 
 
Puttees – 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 175 
(a) Dark blue; 
(b) Khaki. 
 
P.T. Uniform – White for female police officers. 
 
Riding Breeches  – Dark blue Bedford co rd with strapping of same 
material. 
 
Riding Breeches – As above with white mohair braid 1 ½ inches wide 
down seams. 
 
Riding Whip – 3 feet long with leather handle. 
 
Satches – Black leather for female police officers. 
 
Shirts – Khaki. 
 
Shirts – Flannel - Navy Pattern. 
 
Shirts – Grey Flannelette. 
 
Shoes – Black leather for female police officers. 
 
Shorts – Khaki drill with loops for belts, truncheon and side pockets.  
 
Shorts – White drill navy pattern. 
 
Shoulder Chains – Steel ring. 
 
Skirts – Dark blue garnaline for female police officers. 
 
Skirts – Dark blue Serge for female police officers. 
 
Socks – Dark blue for female police officers. 
 
Socks – White for female police officers. 
 
Spurs – Jack – Nickel-plated with straps complete. 
 
Stick - Walking. 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 176 
 
Stockings – Black for female police officers. 
 
Sword Belt and Slings  – White buff with white metal fittings, Cavalry 
pattern. 
 
Sword – Cavalry pattern, steel hilt and scabbard. 
 
Sword Knot – Buff Calvary. 
 
Trousers – Serge – With truncheon and side pockets. 
 
Trousers – Serge – With 1 ½ inch white strip down seams. 
 
Truncheon – Long with leather strap. 
 
Truncheon – Short, with leather strap. 
 
Tunic – White Drill –Shoulder straps of the same material with letters 
"T.T.P.S." in white metal one inch from the seam and t o fasten with 
one small Service button, stand -up collar to fasten with two hooks, 
five large Service buttons in front, outside pockets on breast of coat 
with flaps to button with small Service buttons, sides of tunic to be 
split four inches, loops for duty badge on left sleeve. 
 
Tunic – White Drill – As above but with pointed cuffs 5 ½ inches 
deep. 
 
Tunic – Serge – Similar to Tunic, white. 
 
Tunic – Serge – Similar to Tunic, white but with shoulder straps and 
Austrian knot on cuffs of white bubular braid, wh ite piping along back 
arm of sleeve and back of tunic, blue and white epaulettes.  
 
Whistle – Brass, nickel-plated, with chain. 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 177 
 
Whistle Cord – Black. 
 
Whistle Cord – White. 
 
ORDERS OF DRESS 
 
(i) Review Order: 
 White helmet with spike and chain, white tunic, w hite waist belt, 
pouch, frog, blue trousers, ankle boots, rifle and bayonet when 
ordered or sword for Mounted Police. Dark blue regulation cap and 
skirt black stockings and black leather shoes for female police 
officers. 
 
 Mounted Branch, when mounted : Whi te braided riding 
breeches, blue pastron, lancer girdle, aiguillettes and shoulder 
chains, Jack boots and spurs, sword lance with blue and white 
pennon when ordered. 
(ii) Marching Order: 
 White helmet with leather chin -strap or forage cap, blue tunic, 
leather w aist belt, pouch, frog, rifle and bayonet or sword for 
Mounted Branch (unless otherwise ordered), trousers, ankle boots 
and cloak. 
 Mounted Branch, when mounted : Riding breeches, Jack boots 
or puttees as ordered, sword, cape on saddle, revolver and pouch 
if ordered. 
(iii)  Drill Order: 



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 178 
 White helmet and leather chinstrap or forage cap, grey shirt, 
long trousers, leather waist belt and ankle boots. Frog, sword (for 
Mounted Branch) or rifle and bayonet, unless otherwise ordered. 
 Dark blue regulation cap, dark blue  garnaline bush tunic and 
skirt, black leather belt, black stockings and black leather shoes for 
female police officers. 
 Mounted Branch, when mounted : As in Marching Order, but 
with grey shirt. 
(iv) Patrol Order: 
 No. 1 – White helmet with leather chinstrap, w hite tunic, blue 
and white waist belt, truncheon, blue trousers, and ankle boots. 
 No. 2 – White helmet with chinstrap, grey shirt, brown leather 
belt, truncheon, long trousers, and ankle boots. 
 No. 3 – Blue forage cap, grey shirt, brown leather belt, 
truncheon, long trousers, ankle boots 
 No. 4 – Blue forage cap, blue tunic, brown leather belt, 
truncheon, blue trousers, ankle boots. 
 Waterproof will be worn as ordered. 
 Patrol Order for female police officers – Similar to Drill Order. 
 Mounted Branch, when mounted: Riding breeches, puttees and 
spurs, or Jack boots as ordered, rolled cap on saddle. 
 
(v)   Tactical Dress 
 Long sleeve navy blue shirt, with ―Police‖ on the back, black 
pants with cargo pockets, nylon belt with hook type buckle, black 
military boots or operational type, peak cap with ―Police‖ on front, the 
name of the tactical unit to be worn on top right of shirt pocket.  



 
                                                                                                                                                         180 179 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regulation 144 
 
APPENDIX E 
 
 
STATEMENT OF INDEBTEDNESS 
 
As at ………………20........ 
 
Name .....……..........……….................................. 
Rank...............…........……………............... Married, Single or Other ….……….……..... 
Division or Branch ...………….….………....           Number of dependants ..............……............ 
Salary .......................……….…………............... 
Salary after deductions .…………………............. 
 
 
To whom Indebted 
 
 
 
Reason for 
which 
Debt was 
incurred 
 
 
 
 
 
How 
Secured 
 
 
Terms 
of 
Repaym
ent 
 
 
Amount 
now 
Outstan
ding 
 
Name 
 
 
Date 
Incurre
d 
      
      
      




 
                                                                                                                                                         180 180 
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
 
Date  .................................20 ............ Signature.....................………………… 
 
 
 
Made this             day of                           , 2007. 
 
Laid in the House of Representatives this 20th day of April, 2007. 
(Acting) Clerk of the House 
Approved by the House of Representatives this 21st day of May, 2007 
 
 
(Acting) Clerk of the House 
 
 
 
 