2022 POLICE PROMOTION (MAIN) EXAMINATION
TO THE RANK OF CORPORAL
SUBJECT : POLICE DUTIES II - INVESTIGATIONS,
EVIDENCE AND PROCEDURES
DATE : 26 NOVEMBER, 2022
TIME ALLOWED ; 2% HOURS
INSTRUCTIONS:
THIS PAPER HAS THREE (3) SECTIONS, CANDIDATES MUST ATTEMPT ALL
SECTIONS.
THE EXAMINATION IS WORTH 100 MARKS.
CANDIDATES ARE REQUIRED TO OBTAIN A MINIMUM OF 50% OF THE
POSSIBLE MARKS IN EACH SECTION.
IN A BLACK OR BLUE INK PEN, WRITE YOUR EXAMINATION NUMBER ON THE
COVER OF THE EXAMINATION ANSWER BOOKLET AND ON THE TOP OF
EVERY PAGE THROUGHOUT THE BOOKLET.
YOU ARE REMINDED OF THE NEED TO USE PROPER DICTION, CORRECT
SPELLING, STANDARD GRAMMAR AND AN ORDERLY, LEGIBLE AND NEAT
PRESENTATION OF YOUR WORK.
EACH SECTION MUST BEGIN ON A NEW PAGE.
DO NOT WRITE YOUR NAME, INITIALS OR REGIMENTAL NUMBER
ANYWHERE IN YOUR EXAMINATION ANSWER BOOKLET.
DO NOT IDENTIFY YOURSELF IN ANYWAY OTHER THAN YOUR
EXAMINATION CANDIDATE NUMBER.
NB:- QUESTIONS ANSWERED IN EXCESS WILL NOT BE CORRECTED.


--- page break ---

SECTION 1A - MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS (1 mark each) Total 5 marks
Instructions: This section consists of five (5) multiple choice questions. Complete this
Section 1A by copying the question number into your answer booklet and write the
letter of your choice from the list of options.
1. Which of the following situations of contact may give rise to criminal liability?
A. A police officer taps M on his shoulder.
B. A bumps into B at a busy supermarket.
C. P mistakenly stops his bicycle on R’s foot, but then refuses to move off
of it.
D. F shakes hand with G
2. Which of the following cannot give rise to criminal liability by omission?
A. A duty arising out of a contract
B. A duty arising out of a relationship
C. A duty arising out of a sense of religious obligation
D. A duty arising from the assumption of care for another
3. Which of the following can grant bail to a person accused of murder?
A. The Chief Magistrate
B. A High Court Judge
Cc. A Justice of the Peace sitting in the absence of a magistrate
D. All of the above
E. None of the above
4. The notion conveys is that of taking an unjustifiable risk.
A. Carefree
B. Dangerous
Cc. Irresponsibility
D. Recklessness
9. Which of the following means that the prosecution has to prove the charge against
the accused in criminal accused?
A. The burden of proot


--- page break ---

B. The standard of proof
C. Judicial Review
Dz. The fact of proof
SECTION 1B - TRUE/FALSE QUESTIONS (1 mark each) Total 10 marks
Instructions: This Section has ten (10) questions for you to label TRUE or FALSE.
Complete Section 1B by copying the question number into your answer booklet and
write True/T OR False/F next to the number:
1. Being found with 32 grams of marijuana will not constitute a trafficking offence,
unless it was on a university compound.
2. Because of the presumption of innocence, the prosecution must prove always its
case beyond the shadow of a doubt.
3. Re-examination is the second stage of witness examination at a trial.
4. Evenaslight but unlawful touching will constitute a battery, except when hustling
to get to the court.
5. Being unlawfully incarcerated is a ground to petition for a writ of Habeas Corpus.
6. | Harassment of a person is a private matter and not a criminal offence.
7. The two triggers for use of the Judges Rules are custody and interrogation.
8. Bail is usually set in the sentencing phase of a trial.
9. Fraud is considered as a crime against property.
10. Police have the unfettered right to stop and frisk any person, once they are in a
public place.
SECTION 1C ~ SHORT ANSWER QUESTIONS (2-4 marks each) Total 15 marks
Instructions: This Section 1C comprises five (5) short answer questions. Copy the
Section and the question number into your answer booklet and respond as necessary or
follow the individual question’s requirements.
1. Rule 5(e) of the Judges Rules provides that where a police officer is
finished with the recording of a statement from a person under caution,
such person shall be asked to read over the statement, and among other
things, he shall be asked to write and sign a prescribed certificate at the
end of the statement.
Accurately transcribe the words of the prescribed certificate that the
person will be asked to write. (4 marks)
2. Evidence may be presented to the court in several forms. State the
meanings of the following forms of evidence.
(i) Parol evidence


--- page break ---

(ii) | Documentary evidence

(iii) Real evidence (3 marks)
3. Under the rules of evidence, the court may take judicial notice of certain

matters.

Explain what is meant by the term ‘judicial notice’. (3 marks)
4. Define the term ‘indecent assault’ under section 15(3) of the Sexual

Offences Act, Chapter 11:28 (3 marks)
5. Sections 4A and 4B of the Offences Against the Person Act Chapter 11:08

creates two partial defenses to the offence of murder.

List them. (2 marks)

SECTION 2 - MINI CASE STUDY Total (30 marks)

Instructions: This Section comprises two (2) mini case study questions for 15 marks

each. Copy the Section and question number into your answer booklet and respond

as required.

1. At 10:00 am one morning a resident in your station district telephoned you and made
an inquiry. He was interested in knowing whether any progress had been made, in
connection with a report that he lodged earlier that same morning. At your request,
he recited the facts of his report as follows: at around 9:50 p.m. the previous night he
secured his house and retired to bed. He had his living room windows closed but he
did not lock them. Just before 5:00 a.m. the following morning, he was awakened by
a noise in the house. He searched the house but found no one. However, he observed
that his television set valued ($9,000.00) dollars was missing, and one of his living
room windows slightly ajar. He gave no one permission to remove his television set
from his premises. On checking the station diary, you saw where a report was
recorded but not yet classified. You discussed the matter with a colleague in the
reception area, who said the report should be classified as “larceny in a dwelling
house”. However, another constable is in disagreement, and has suggested that it
should be classified as a “burglary”. The station detective, who was also present,
informs you that the correct classification on those facts should be “house breaking
and larceny. The supervising corporal has since assigned this report to you for
investigation.

As the investigator assigned to inquire into this report, state the evidence/ ingredients
that will be required to substantiate a classification in relation to each of the three
offences under consideration, and state with reasons which is the correct classification
for the report that was made by the resident.

(15 marks)

2. Ten months ago, Vee’s teenaged daughter Precious was viciously raped by D’mon.
Since that time Vee learnt that the police had charged D’mon for two other offences
of a similar nature, but had managed to be out on bail. One night, Vee followed
D’mon into a bar. She sat next to him and soon a conversation started. She secretly
slipped a pill into his drink which left him in a stupefied state shortly after he took a
couple sips. At that stage, she asked another patron to assist her to get her ‘boyfriend’
into her car, as he was drunk. The patron assisted, whereupon Vee took D’mon to her
apartment. At that location, Vee stripped D’mon of his clothing and tied him
spreadeagled on top of her dining table. To ensure that she had him properly bound,


--- page break ---

Vee tightened the knots around his limbs until they were reddened and bruised.
When D’mon regained his senses, he saw Vee standing over him with a large knife in
her hand. She told him about the rape of her daughter, and that she needed to hear
him confess before she proceeds with what she intends to do. With a grin on his face,
D’mon told her to that he will tell her what she wants to hear if she takes him to the
bedroom. That response infuriated Vee causing her to scream out aloud. Her
neighbour heard the scream and alerted the police. Moments later the police entered
the house to rescue Vee, and saw her pacing back and forth in her living room. After
their initial interview with Vee, the police untied D’mon and took both parties to the
police station on investigation. Vee had also told the responding officers that she
never intended to kill D’mon, she was just acting in defence of her daughter, by trying
to get him to confess for her camera phone which was recording him. The inspector
in charge has assigned you to investigate the matter.
For what offence/s, if any, may Vee be liable based on her motive for the action that
she took? As the investigating officer, what ingredients will you be seeking to obtain,
in order to acquire the evidence necessary to prove the case/s for the offences under
consideration?
(15 marks)
SECTION 3 - CONSTRAINED RESPONSE QUESTIONS Total (40 marks)
Instructions: This Section comprises three constrained response questions for 20
marks each. You are required to answer ANY TWO of your choosing. Copy the Section
and question number into your answer booklet and respond as required.
1. (A) Where a motor vehicle is parked on a road in contravention of any
of the provisions of the Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Act
Chapter 48:50 (“the Act”), or is left in any road in such a manner
that it is likely to cause an obstruction to persons lawfully using
any such road, Section 108 (1)(a) and (b) of the Act provide two
actions that a police officer may take.
State the provisions of Section 108 (1)(a) and (b) of the Act. (8 marks)
(B) Under Section 2 of the Act, the term ‘parking’ means causing or
permitting a vehicle, whether occupied or not, to stand in a road.
However, there are five (5) exceptions.
List the exceptions. (10 marks)
(C) Define the term ‘driver’ under the Act. (2 marks)
2. (A) (a) Section 40(1) of the Children’s Act Ch. 46:01 (the “Act”) makes
it an offence for a person to among other things, knowingly
publish, distribute, transmit or have in his possession any child
pornography or copies thereof. However, subsection 40(5) lists
nine (9) categories of persons who are exempted from liability
under subsection 40(1) under certain circumstances.
List any six (6) of the nine categories of persons exempted with the
corresponding circumstances. (12 marks)
(B) Define the following terms under section 3 of the Act: -
(i) Child (2 marks)


--- page break ---

(ii) Penetration. (6 marks)
3. (A) As a general rule, hearsay evidence is inadmissible in court.

However, there are certain exceptions to this rule, one of which is

a ‘dying declaration’.

Define what is a dying declaration. (4 marks)
(B) List the six grounds/elements that must exist in order for a dying

declaration to be admissible in evidence in the courts. (12 marks)
(C) Star is a popular artiste in the entertainment industry. Last month

Star took her fiancé Beau to an exclusive restaurant to celebrate his

birthday. After having their dinner, they walked to the restaurant's

carpark to get their vehicle. Suddenly, a motor vehicle drove

alongside them and several gunshots came from the occupants of

the vehicle, before it sped off. Both Star and Beau were hit, but

Beau received wounds to his chest. While lying on the ground,

Beau said the following words to Star: ‘Babes, yuh know is Robo who

shoot we. Call the ambulance quick, but if yuh see I eh make it, at least yuh

know who to watch out for.’ Star was treated and discharged, but

Beau succumbed to his injuries and died.

Star whether Beau’s statement to Star can be admitted in evidence

in court as a dying declaration. Give brief reason for your answer. (4 marks)
