2022 POLICE PROMOTION (MAIN) EXAMINATION
TO THE RANK OF CORPORAL
SUBJECT : POLICE DUTIES I
DATE : 26" NOVEMBER, 2022
TIME ALLOWED : 21%,HOURS
INSTRUCTIONS: ,
THIS PAPER HAS THREE (3) SECTIONS, CANDIDATES MUST ATTEMPT ALL
SECTIONS.
THE EXAMINATION IS WORTH 100 MARKS.
CANDIDATES ARE REQUIRED TO OBTAIN A MINIMUM OF 50% OF THE
POSSIBLE MARKS IN EACH SECTION.
IN A BLACK OR BLUE INK PEN, WRITE YOUR EXAMINATION NUMBER ON THE
COVER OF THE EXAMINATION ANSWER BOOKLET AND ON THE TOP OF
EVERY PAGE THROUGHOUT THE BOOKLET.
YOU ARE REMINDED OF THE NEED TO USE PROPER DICTION, CORRECT
SPELLING, STANDARD GRAMMAR AND AN ORDERLY, LEGIBLE AND NEAT
PRESENTATION OF YOUR WORK.
EACH SECTION MUST BEGIN ON A NEW PAGE.
DO NOT WRITE YOUR NAME, INITIALS OR REGIMENTAL NUMBER
Le N A SREY INWIVEDEIN
ANYWHERE IN YOUR EXAMINATION ANSWER BOOKLET.
DO NOT IDENTIFY YOURSELF IN ANYWAY OTHER THAN YOUR
DO_NOT IDENTIFY YOURSELF IN ANYWAY OTHER THAN YOUR
EXAMINATION CANDIDATE NUMBER.
NB:- QUESTIONS ANSWERED IN EXCESS WILL NOT BE CORRECTED.


--- page break ---

SECTION 1A - MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS (1 mark each) Total 10 marks
Instructions: This Section consists of ten (10) multiple choice questions. Complete
this Section 1A by copying the question number into your answer booklet and write
the letter of your choice from the list of options.
1. In accordance with Paragraph 14 Standing Order 53, which of the following is not
related to the duties of Police Officers who enter premises without a warrant?
(A) Give assistance to a person who suffered an injury.
(B) Ensure the welfare and safety of a child on the premises.
(C) Provides comfort to victims of domestic violence.
(D) Prevent any further breach of the law.
2. Which of the following is incomplete in accordance with Part II of Departmental
Order 56 dated 17/03/2020?
(A) Guidelines that govern the Philosophy of Policing for the People.
(B) Amended Paragraph 5 of Standing Order 6 relating to Appearance and
Turnout.
(C) Guidelines that govern the implementation of Private Bailiff Intake
Exercise.
(D) Amended Standing Order 17 relating to Handing Over of the Charge
Room.
3. The following comprise Administrative Directions to the Police on Interrogation
and the taking of Statements, except: -
(A) Provide protection of persons from improper action by ensuring that
statements made are voluntarily given.
(B) As far as practicable children should only be interviewed in the presence
of a parent or guardian.
(C) Supply accused persons a written statement of charges.
(D) Make reasonable arrangement of comfort and refreshment of persons in
attendance for questioning.
4, In accordance with Standing Order 11, the following are forms of patrol except:
(A) Canine.
(B) Hotspot.
(C) Helicopter.
(D) Bicycle.


--- page break ---

9.  Inaccordance with Standing Order 10, which of the following is correct as it relates
to when an unserved summons shall be returned to the court of issue: -
(A) Not less than 48 hours before the date of hearing.
(B) Within 48 hours of the date of hearing.
(C) Not less than 24 hours before the date of hearing.
(D) Within 24 hours of the date of hearing.

6. Which of the following circumstances does NOT allow for arrest without a
warrant?

(A) A member of the public makes a charge of aggravated assault and there is
reasonable evidence of same.

(B) A member of the public suspects another of loitering because of his
appearance.

(C) A member of the public is found loitering in a public space without a
satisfactory reason.

(D) A property owner who with reasonable cause suspects another of stealing
his property.

7. Inaccordance with Standing Order 10, which of the following is correct as it relates
to when an ejectment warrant must be executed on a day that the court is sitting
between the hours of: -

(A) 8.00am and 5.00pm.
(B) 8.00am and 4.00pm.
(C) 9.00am and 5.00pm.
(D) 9.00am and 4.00pm.

8. Which of the following is not complete in accordance with Standing Order 26, as it
relates to the disposal of a perishable article by the Second Division Officer in
charge of the station?

(A) Obtain an order from the Court for direction on how to dispose of the
article.

(B) Have the article photographed by a professional?

(C) Sell the articles in accordance with Section 52 of the Police Service Act,
Chapter 15:01.

(D) Deduct any expenses incurred in connection with the sale of the article.

9. In accordance with Regulation 150 of the Police Service Regulations 2007, the
following are correct as it relates to corrupt practice except: -

(A) Knowingly makes or signs a false statement in an official document or
book.


--- page break ---

(B) Fails to account for or to make a prompt and correct return of any money
or property received by him in his official capacity.
(C) Directly or indirectly solicits any gratuity, gift or reward, subscription or
testimonial without consent.
(D) Improperly uses his position as an officer for his private advantage.
10. Which of the following is not set out in Standing Order 44, as one of the primary
functions of Police Officers investigating a report of a Road Traffic Accident?
(A) Determine whether the accident is of a trivial or serious nature.
(B) To give aid to the injured.
(C) Record the facts.
(D) Ascertain whether there has been any contravention of the Motor Vehicles
and Road Traffic Laws.
SECTION 1B - TRUE/FALSE QUESTIONS (1 mark each) Total 10 marks
Instructions: This Section has ten (10) questions for you to label TRUE or FALSE.
Complete Section 1B by copying the question number into your answer booklet and write
True/T OR False/F next to the number:
1. Departmental Order 179 dated October 13, 2009, amended Standing Order 17.
2. The General duties of a Police Officer are provided for in Section 46 of the
Police Service Act No. 7 of 2006.
3. Criminal Law Act 10:04 illustrates the guidelines pertaining to the use of force.
4. In accordance with Standing Order 10, a distress warrant may be in the
possession of the Police Officer executing it, and this warrant can be executed
at any time.
5. A police officer shall not request a mentally ill person to give and or sign a
written statement except on the advice of a Psychiatrist.
6. Police Officers have the authority to stop and search vehicles as set out in
Standing Order 40, which relates to Firearms and Ammunition.
7. In accordance with Standing Order 32, Police Officers are required to record
three (3) types of statements.
8. Part If of Departmental Order 211 dated November 26, 1996, established the
Community Policing Section.
9. Police Officers of the rank of Corporal or above are authorized to grant bail to
a person arrested without a warrant for a Summary Offence, if it is not
practical to bring such persons before a magistrate or Justice of the Peace
within forty-eight (48) hours, after he or she was taken into custody.
10. Section 109 of the Summary Courts Act Chapter 4:20, provides the
requirements for Medical Testimony to be admitted into evidence.


--- page break ---

SECTION 1C - SHORT ANSWER QUESTIONS (2 marks each) Total 10 marks

Instructions: This Section 1C comprises five (5) short answer questions. Copy the Section

and the question number into your answer booklet and respond as necessary or follow

the individual question’s requirements.

1. State the guidelines for arresting an offender in accordance with Section

104, of the Summary Court Act Chapter 4:20. (2 marks)
2. In accordance with Section 21(1) and (2) of the Domestic Violence Act
Chapter 45:56, explain the duties of Police Officers. (2 marks)
3. In accordance with Regulation 105(1) and (2) of the Police Service
Regulations 2007, specify the action to be taken in relation to prisoners’ (2 marks)
children.
4, State the guidelines for taking a statement from a mentally sub-normal
person. (2 marks)
9. Inaccordance with the Police Service Regulations 2007, state the numerical
strength of escorting prisoners. (2 marks)
SECTION 2 - MINI CASE STUDY Total (30 marks)
Instructions: This Section comprises two (2) mini case study questions for 15 marks
each. Copy the Section and question number into your answer booklet and respond
as required.

1. Firefighting operations are the responsibility of the Trinidad and Tobago Fire Service.
On October 31, 2022 there was a report of a fire made via telephone to your Station
district. The actual facts of the fire itself were sketchy. However, three dwelling houses
were said to be alight. At the time of the call, there was no information on the
whereabouts of the owner or occupants of the dwelling houses, as to whether they were
trapped within the burnt buildings or not.

The Second Division Officer of the Station appointed you and two very new members of
your shift to investigate this report. On arrival on the scene, you realized that you were
the most senior Police Officer at the scene of the fire. Members of the public at the scene
were shouting, providing conflicting information, as to whether persons were trapped
within the burnt buildings or not. One group of persons were loudly accusing the absent
owner of the three houses of arson. Cars were also slowing down in an attempt, to see
what was going on. The Senior Fire Officer advises that you should call your station in
order to find the owner quickly as he may attempt to flee the country.
In accordance with Standing Order 34
(A) Based on the facts presented in this case, explain your duties as the

Police Officer at the scene of this fire.
(B) State the procedural steps you are required to follow in conducting

the investigation into this report
(C) Explain why the advice given to you by the Senior Fire Office is

premature.

(15 marks)
ines,


--- page break ---

2. The data from the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service shows that between 2010 and 2019,
there were 8,383 people reported missing. However, out of that number 408 people were
still not found at the end of 2019. For the last year scores of other people were reported
missing, among them several young women, a few of whom have since been located and
returned home. Other such missing persons remain unaccounted for.

A list with the names of 112 people who were missing in Trinidad and Tobago as of
September 2020 was published in the media. However, there was an indication that the
actual number of unaccounted people may have been ten times the number published.
It is important to note that hundreds of people have gone missing for decades, some for
a few years, others for mere months or just days, leaving families and friends
traumatized. Regardless of how long they have been gone, it is nerve-wracking for loved
ones as the anguish and pain have become unbearable as time passes by. Moreover, the
families have indicated that they are offered no hope by the police whom they have
criticized for doing nothing to assist.
(A) (i) Based on the reasons in the case, list three (3) reasons why 408
persons may still be missing as at 2019.
(ii) Describe why any one (1) of those reasons may lead to criminal
charges.

(B) Based on the requirements of Standing Order 51, explain:-

(i) The duties of a Police Officer on receiving a missing person

report.
(ii) The duties of the Police Officers who are detailed to investigate a
report of a missing person.

(C) In instances where young women were reported missing, located

and returned home, what action if any can the police take.

(15 marks)

SECTION 3 - ESSAY QUESTIONS Total (40 marks)

Instructions: This Section comprises two (2) essay questions. You are required to answer

any ONE (1). Copy the question number into your answer booklet and respond in the format

of an essay of no more than 250 words. (Note that marks will be awarded as follows: -

Content 36 marks, Use of English Language 4 marks).

de You are the lone Corporal at the Station and the Second Division Officer in charge
detailed you to investigate an application for Theatres and Dance Halls License. You
are also required to visit other similar licensed premises in the district. Based on the
requirements of Standing Order 22, explain your duties and responsibilities in both
instances.

2. “No one can lawfully embark on any type of protest action, unless they notify the
Commissioner of Police beforehand and in writing of their intention to do so,” said an
Attorney at law.

In accordance with Standing Order 54, put this statement in context by explaining the
duties and responsibilities of Police Officers, along with the procedures for dealing
with protests or demonstrations.
