 
 
  
FRAUD AND MONEY 
LAUNDERING IN 
TRINIDAD AND 
TOBAGO 
 
An Examination of the Relationship 
between Fraud and Money 
Laundering in Trinidad and Tobago     
Crime and 
Problem 
Analysis 
Branch 
Research Unit 
1/RE/2018 Date of Publication:  Tuesday 1st May, 2018 



1 
 
Table of Contents  
List of Tables and Figures  2 
Acknowledgements 3 
  
Section 1  
Introduction   4 
Definition of Money Laundering  4 
Brief History/ Evolution of Money Laundering  5 
How Money Laundering Works  6 
Placement  6 
Layering  7 
Integration 7 
Effects of Money Laundering  7 
Money Laundering Legislation in Trinidad and Tobago 10 
  
Section 2  
Definition of Fraud  11 
Fraud Offences in Trinidad and Tobago  12 
Analysis of Fraud trends in Trinidad and Tobago, 2012 to 2017 15 
  
Section 3   
Relationship between Fraud and Money Laundering in Trinidad and 
Tobago 
18 
  
Section 4  
Challenges to Anti-Fraud and Anti-Money Laundering Efforts in 
Trinidad and Tobago 
21 
 Insufficient Legislative Framework 21 
 Low Priority of Money Laundering by Law Enforcement  21 
 Inadequate Implementation of Preventative Measures  22 
 No Confiscation of Unexplained Wealth/ Assets 22 
 Lack of Training for Anti-Money Laundering Investigation 
and Prosecution 
22 
 Inconsistent Recording of Money Laundering Offences on 
RMS 
22 
 Gap between Occurred Date and Reported Date of Money 
Laundering Offences 
23 
  
Section 5   
Conclusion  24 
Recommendations  24 
  
References  27 
  



2 
 
List of Tables and Figures  
 
 
Figure 1: Stages of Money Laundering  
 
6 
Table 1: Number of Fraud Offences in Trinidad and Tobago, 2012 to 
2017 
 
15 
Table 2: Top Ten Station Districts for Fraud Reports in Trinidad and 
Tobago, 2012 to 2017 
 
16 
Table 3: Top Ten Fraud Offences in Trinidad and Tobago, 2012 to 
2017 
 
17 
Table 4: Reports of Money Laundering and Predicate Offences in 
Trinidad and Tobago, 2012 to 2017 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



3 
 
Acknowledgements  
The Crime and Problem Analysis (CAPA) Branch would like to extend our deepest thanks to the 
following persons, units and organizations for their information, time and efforts that contributed 
to the completion of this paper: 
1. Susan Francois, Head of FIUTT 
2. Senior Superintendent of Police (Ag.) Totaram Dookie and Members of the Fraud Squad 
3. Senior Superintendent of Police (Ag.) William Nurse of ACIB  
4. No. 13926 Sgt. Gerald Baldwin of ACIB 
5. Senior Superintendent of Police  (Ag.), Terrence Pierre and Members of the Financial 
Investigations Branch (FIB) 
6. The Research Unit of the Crime and Problem Analysis Branch  
 
The Research Unit who is respo nsible for producing this docum ent is supervised by 
Acting Inspector Anand Motilal and comprise of the following persons:  
 Ms. Brionne Antoine  
 Ms. Asha Charles  &  
 No. 16153 PC Jason James  
 
 
 
 
 
 



4 
 
Section 1 
Introduction 
Money laundering and fraud offences are financial crimes that have generated 
tremendous intra- and cross-jurisdictional discussion a nd prevention efforts within recent years. 
Previously, there was a tendency to examine these as distinct issues rather than a n inter-related 
phenomenon. However, the evolution of these crimes and their methodologies illustrates that 
there is a relationship  between fraud and money laundering. The purpose of this article is to 
examine the nature of the relationship between frau d offences and money laundering in Trinidad 
and Tobago. The discussion will commence with looking specifically at money laundering; it s 
definition, history, processes, effects , local legislation and policies. The second section presents 
an analysis of Fraud offences in Trinidad and Tobago and the relevant legislation. Subsequent 
sections will evaluate the connection bet ween fraud and mon ey laundering as well as  challenges 
to anti-fraud and anti-money laundering (AML) efforts. Recommendations will later be advanced 
for improved AML and anti-fraud prevention in Trinidad and Tobago.  
Definition of Money Laundering  
Within the last two decade s, there has been mounting concern about money laundering 
regionally and globally.  Money laundering includes a wide array of actions and processes with 
detrimental implications for multiple sectors, such as law enforcement and the financial  system. 
The Ass ociation of Certified Fraud Examiners (2012 , 700 ), defines money laundering as “the 
disguising of the existence, nature, source, ownership, location, and disposition of property 
derived from criminal activity”. In other words, money laundering is the proce ss by which illicit 
funds, which are the proceeds of crimes, are legitimized by concealing their origin. When 
criminal activities produce significant profits for criminal groups and individuals, it becomes 
necessary to find methods to utilize the f unds wit hout drawing the attention from law 
enforcement or financial institutions to the parties involved.  These  methods often include  
moving funds to locations where suspicion of their origin is less likely, changing it into other 
forms or concealing the true so urces. Another purpose of money laundering is to convert large 



5 
 
amount of cash into other types of assets. Typically, illegitimate funds are expended on property, 
homes, cars and luxury items.  
Brief History/ Evolution of Money Laundering 
Money laundering,  as a practice, has an extensive history dating back centuries to the 
Middle Ages when usury was a criminal offence. Illicit gains from the high interest rates were 
hidden through various means by the money lenders and merchants so involved.  It is also widely 
thought that money laundering mechanisms were being used in China for thousands of years  
before, when merchants disguised the profits from trade by converting it into easily moveable 
assets and investing in businesses in remote villages.  Money launder ing emerged in the United 
States in the 1920s and 1930s when P rohibition and a restriction on gambling generated 
substantial sums of money for  criminals. This resulted in a dramatic increase in financial crime 
since several mechanisms had to be used to conceal the origins of cash gained through the illegal 
import and sale of alcohol and gambling. According to the International Bar Association website, 
Al Capone was thought to have grossed an approximated $100,000,000 per year from illicit 
activities. Howeve r, criminals subsequently avoided the critical mistakes and loopholes of Al 
Capone by becoming more organized in their approach. They established  businesses with a dual 
purpose; as mechanisms to launder money  and as  “fronts” for their illegal activities. 
Furthermore, transferring profits to bank accounts and companies in foreign countries with lax 
financial policies was another method. Meyer Lansky who practised all of the above money 
laundering schemes in the 1940s, is credited for shaping mo dern day money  laundering 
practices.  
Uribe (2003) maintains that the focus was usually placed on the crime itself rather than 
the proceeds of the crime. Indeed, “the seizure of goods, when it applied to crimes with 
economic motivation, was considered a punishment again st the underlying crime” (Uribe 2003, 
2). He goes on to state that the actual classification of money laundering and attempts to launder 
money is fairly recent, with the US being the first to do so in 1986. Subsequently, money 
laundering was viewed as a di stinct offence “because it is an independent complement of the 
underlying crime, and thus considered a motive for the confiscation of goods” (Uribe 2003, 2). 



6 
 
For some countries, money laundering is considered a more serious offence than the underlying 
crime.   
How Money laundering Works 
 
Figure 1 Stages of Money Laundering  
 
Source: The United Nations, Office of Drugs and Crime  
The money laundering process consists of three steps listed below: 
1. Placement  
2. Layering 
3. Integration 
Placement  
Placement is the process where the illicit cash generated  from crimes is deposited into a 
financial institution in an effort to obscure its origins.  This can be achieved in different ways, 
such as dividing the money into smaller amounts for deposit, which is called smurfing. Another 
method involves purchasing other monetary instruments like cheques or money orders. The 
ACFE (2012) states that the detection  of money laundering schemes is most likely to occur 
during this initial stage.  




7 
 
 
Layering  
This is the second stage of t he money laundering process. Once the funds have been 
placed undetected within the financial system, the funds are subjected to a series of conversions 
or movements. Complex patterns of financial transactions, such as wiring funds through multiple 
accounts across various banks in countries that do not comply with anti -money laundering 
regulations, or purchasing inves tment instruments , are employed. Another method is moving 
money under the guise of paying for goods and services. These activities are meant to cr eate 
layers that make the audit trail more difficult to follow. The ACFE (2012) states that this is the 
most difficult area of the money laundering process to detect.  
Integration  
This is the final stage where the funds re -enter the economy by appearing a s legitimate 
business transactions. The ACFE (2012) maintains that while this stage is also difficult to detect, 
it creates a paper trail, s uch as invoices, loan documents, che ques and deeds for real estate. 
Cooperation from foreign organizations and informants can increase the chances of detection.  
Effects of Money Laundering  
The Association for Certified Anti -Money Laundering Specialists (ACAMS) notes that money 
laundering has significant economic and social ramifications for any country.  The gravity o f these 
consequences is especially felt in developing countries and emerging markets. They go on to emphasize 
that when funds can be easily passed from one in stitution or there are simplistic systems that do not 
scrutinize financial customers and transacti ons, there is a higher risk for money laundering to occur. The 
following are among the most significant economic consequences of money laundering  according to 
ACAMS (2016):  
 
(a) Increased Exposure to Corruption and Organized Crime  
Criminal activity becomes h ighly profitable when money laundering efforts are 
successful. Once money laundering becomes  widespread within a country , it is more likely to 
facilitate corruption. Organized crime groups  are able to infiltrate into the country’s  public and 
private sector  and their presence is associated with high levels of corruption in both areas . 



8 
 
Criminals may attempt to bribe those regarded as gatekeepers and guardians such as government 
officials, lawyers, accountants as well as employees of financial or non -financial institutions in 
order to conduct their criminal enterprises. Moreover in jurisdictions that have weaker laws and 
enforcement, corruption generates money laundering. Another spin-off of money laundering here 
is the escalation of bribery in financial institutions, the legislature, enforcement agencies, police, 
supervisory authorities, and even with courts and prosecutors.  
Typically, countries are regarded as havens for money laundering under these circumstances: 
1. Limited numbers of predicat e crimes for money  laundering. (Predicate offences are 
criminal offences that may allow a country to bring a money laundering charge.) 
2. Restricted types of institutions and persons that fall under the purview of local  money 
laundering laws and regulations. 
3. Poor enforcement of the laws, and weak penalties or pr ovisions that make it difficult to 
confiscate or freeze assets related to money laundering. 
4. Limited regulatory capacity to effectively monitor and supervise  compliance to money 
laundering regulations.  
 
(b) Undermining the Legitimate Private Sector 
Another serious consequence of money laundering in a country is that it undermines the 
legal private sector. The use of front companies is a preferred mechanism for person s who 
engage in money laundering. Front companies are businesses that look legitimate but are 
operated by criminals who merge their illegal proceeds with legitimate funds to conceal the ill-
gotten gains. Thus, front companies have a distinct competitive advantage over their legitimate 
counterparts, since access to significant amounts of illicit funds , allows subsidizing of products 
and services well below market price s. Legitimate businesses cannot compete against front 
companies under these circumstances. Finally, money launderers can manipulate entire industries 
through the use of  front companies and other inves tments in legitimate companies. Potential  
monetary and economic instability is heightened and it is also a means to evade taxes, which 
takes away much needed revenue from a country. Therefore it promotes a “false economy which 
can, in the future , lead to severe economic consequences , particularly when or if the revenue 
stream is no longer in existence.  
 



9 
 
(c) Inhibiting Effect on Foreign Investments  
Despite the fact that  developing countries cannot be too discriminatory about the ir 
sources of capital, there is a dampening effect on foreign direct investment when a country’s 
commercial and financial sectors are perceived to be compromised by organized crime.  
 
(d) Reputation Risk for the Country 
Economic growth and deve lopment can be negatively impacted if a country gains a 
reputation for being a  money laundering haven . Foreign-based financial institutions view the 
enhanced scrutiny involved with working with other institutions in money laundering havens too 
costly, which reduces beneficial opportunities to do business. Furthermore, l egitimate businesses 
located in money laundering havens may endure limited or more inflated costs to access markets 
due to extra scrutiny. The implementation of solid anti -money laundering re gulations and 
controls are crucial since damage to a country’s reputation is much more challenging to correct 
and demands a significant amount of resources.  
 
(e) Risk of International Sanctions 
Countries can be subject ed to comprehensive or targeted sanctions . Comprehensive 
sanctions prohibit almost all transactions with a country. Targeted sanctions prohibit transactions 
with specified industries, entities, or individuals listed on O ffice of Foreign Asset Control’s 
Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked P arties List. Additionally, the Financial Ac tion 
Task Force (FATF) also maintains a list of countries identified as high-risk and non-cooperative, 
whose AML/CFT regimes have strategic deficiencies and are not up to international standards. In 
such cases, FATF requires its members to implement counter -measures against the country such 
as applying enhanced due diligence (EDD) to business relationships and transactions .  This is an 
attempt to encourage the country to improve its anti-money laundering regulations. 
 
(f) Social Costs of Money Laundering  
There are considerable social costs and risks related to the practice of money laundering. 
The first is that money laundering is essential to maintaining the profitability of crime. Secondly, 
drug traffickers, smugglers and other criminals  are able to expand their operations. The cost of 
government expenses and budgets skyrocket given to the need for increased law enforcement , 
increased healthcare costs and other expenditures to combat the serious consequences that result. 



10 
 
Money Laundering Legislation in Trinidad and Tobago 
 
The Proceeds of Crime Act 
This is a n Act to establish the procedure for the confiscation of the proceeds of certain 
offences and for the criminali zation of money laundering. This act defines money laundering as 
action taken when a  person who kno ws or has reasonable grounds to suspect that property is 
criminal property and who— 
1. engages directly or indirectly, in a transaction that involves that criminal property or; 
2. receives, possesses, conceals, dis poses of, disguises, transfers, brings into, or sends out 
of Trinidad and Tobago, that criminal property or; 
3. converts, transfers or removes from Trinidad and Tobago that criminal property. 
The Anti-Terrorism Act  
This is an Act to criminaliz e terrorism and the financing of terrorism, to provide  for the 
detection, prevention, prosecution, convict ion and punishment of terrorist activities and the 
confiscation, forfeiture and seizure of terrorists’ assets and of those invol ved in the financing of 
terrorism and for related matters. 
The Financial Intelligence Unit Act 
This act established the Financial Intelligence Unit of Trinidad and Tobago, for the 
implementation of the recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force  on money 
laundering, the financing of terrorism and for related matters.  The FIU is responsible for 
implementing a system for monitoring the effectiveness of its  policies with respect to money 
laundering and financ ing of terrorism by maintaining comprehensive statistics on: suspicious 
transaction or suspicious activity; reports received and transmitted to law enforcement; money 
laundering and financing of terrorism investigations and convictions; property frozen, seized and 
confiscated; and international requests for mutual legal assistance or other co-operation. 
 



11 
 
Section 2 
Definition of Fraud  
 
Fraud can be defined as “a  false representation of a matter of fact —whether by words or by 
conduct, by false or misleading allegations, or by concealment of what should have been 
disclosed—that deceives and is intended to deceive another so that the individual will act upo n it 
to her or his legal injury ” (West's Encyclopedia of American Law, 2008 ). It is an act meant to 
deprive another of money, goods and services through the concealment of intent. Offences can be 
committed against both individuals and businesses. Fraud is a ‘catch all’ term that is made up of 
a number of different acts. Western Illinois University (2015) has defined fraudulent acts as 
inclusive of but not limited to: 
1. Embezzlement (e.g. theft of cash, using company procurement cards or accounts payable        
systems to purchase personal items). 
2. Forgery or alteration of documents (e.g. che ques, receipts, contracts, purchase orders, 
bills, ID cards, or other identification documents). 
3. Fraudulent financial reporting. 
4. Misappropriation or misuse of resources (e.g. cash, securities, inventory, facilities, 
equipment, services, supplies, or other assets). 
5. Impropriety in the handling or reporting of cash or financial transactions. 
6. Authorization or r eceipt of payment for goods not received or services not performed 
(e.g. payments to fictitious employees or vendors). 
7. Authorization or receipt of unearned wages or benefits. 
Within the Trinidad and Tobago legal framework , it may also be inclusive of crimes such as 
Bribery, Larceny, Forgery and Corruption.  
 



12 
 
Fraud Offences and Legislation in Trinidad and Tobago 
 
Fraud offences in Trinidad and Tobago are covered under multiple Acts such as:  
The Forgery Act Chapter 11:13 
This act defines forgery as the makin g of a false document so that it can be used as if genuine, 
with the intent to defraud or deceive and lays out the punishment. 
The Electronic Transfer of Funds Crime Act Chapter 79:51 
This is meant to regulate the transfer of money via an electronic termin al by use of a card 
for the purpose of instructing or authori zing a financial institution to debit or credit a 
cardholder’s account when anything of value is purchased and for other related purposes 
The Prevention of Corruption Act Chapter 11:11 
An offence of corruption is committed when a person(s)  acting as agents of State solicits 
or agrees to  receive some sort of payment  or advantage to engage in a  transaction wherein the 
State or a public body is a party to. Corruption also involves receiving or accept ing rewards to 
show favour or disfavour to any person in matters related to state affairs.  Also included in this 
act is using or withholding documentation with the intent to deceive  as well as presenting 
documentation which contains false or erroneous  statements which is intended to mislead.  Any 
state agent who uses official information for the purpose of obtaining favour or communicates 
said information  to any other person to enable them to at tain any gift, loan, fee, reward or 
advantage whatsoever is deemed guilty of corruption. 
The Larceny Act Chapter 11:12 
This act targets an array of actions that can be classified as fraudulent activity. It covers 
situations involving employees who steal or embezzles any “chattel, money or valuable security 
belonging to or in the possession or power” of his/her employer. This act also specifies particular 
employees and the actions that might be deemed illegal, they are:  
1. Persons who are employees of the Trinidad and Tobago Post al Service who steal or 
embezzle postal items in the course of transmission of said post.  



13 
 
 
2. Those who hold the office of director or any other executive officer of a corporate or 
public company who falsely takes or applies for their own use or benefit any of the 
property of the body corporate or public company. 
 
Persons with any power of attorney or entrusted guardianship are also mentioned as engaging in 
fraud if: 
1. They put up for sale or transfer of any property or any part thereof to theirs or another’s 
own use or benefit or the use or benefit of any person other than the person by whom he 
was so entrusted. 
 
2. After being entrusted either solely or jointly with any other per son fraudulently converts 
for their or another’s own use or benefit, or the use or benefit of any other person, the 
property or any part thereof or any proceeds thereof. 
 
3. Being a trustee of any property for the use or benefit of any public or charitable 
organization converts or appropriates the same for the use or benefit of any person other 
than the organization or for any purpose  other than the public or charitable purpose or 
otherwise disposes of or destroys such property or any part thereof. 
 
A factor or agent entrusted with goods or any document of title to goods can be considered 
acting in a fraudulent manner if: 
1. They consign, deposit, transfer or deliver  any goods or document of title so entrusted to 
him as and by way of a pledge, lien or security for any money or valuable security 
borrowed or received, or intended to be borrowed or received by him. 
 
2. Accept any advance of any money or valuable security on the faith of any contract or 
agreement to consign, deposit, transfer or deliver any such goods or document of title, is 
liable to imprisonment for seven years; but no such factor or agent is liable to any 
prosecution for consi gning, depositing, transferring or delivering any such goods or 
documents of title, in case the same shall not be made a security for or subject to the 
payment of any greater sum of money than the amount which, at the time of the 
consignment, deposit, transfer or delivery, was justly due and owing to the agent from his 



14 
 
principal, together with the amount of any bill of exchange drawn by or on account of the 
principal and accepted by the factor or agent.  
 
 
3. A loan or advance is made in good faith to consign,  deposit, transfer or deliver such 
goods or documents of title, and the goods or documents of title are actually received by 
the person making the loan or advance, without notice that the factor or agent was not 
authorized to make such pledge or security.  
 
False Pretense with intent to D efraud is another category of offences and defined where a 
person(s): 
1. Obtains from any other person any chattel, money, or valuable security, or causes or 
procures any money to be paid, or any chattel or valuable security t o be delivered, to 
himself or to any other person for the use or benefit or on account of himself or any 
other person. 
 
2. Fraudulently causes or induces any other person — (a) to execute, make, accept, 
endorse, or destroy the whole or any part of any valuable security; or 
 
 
3. Writes, impresses, or affixes their name or the name of any other person, or the seal 
of any corporate body or society, upon any paper or parchment in order that the same 
may be afterwards made or converted into, or used or dealt with as, a  valuable 
security. 
 
4. Incurs any debt or liability under false pretenses, or by means of any other fraud.  
 
 
5. Has, with intent to defraud their creditors, made or caused to be made any gift, 
delivery, transfer or sale of or any charge on his property.  
6. Has, with intent to defraud his creditors concealed or removed any part of his 
property since, or within two months before, the date of any unsatisfied judgment or 
order for payment of money obtained against him.  
 
 



15 
 
Analysis of Fraud Trends in Trinidad and Tobago 2012-2017 
Table 1: Number of Fraud Offences in Trinidad and Tobago, 2012 to 2017 
Source: Crime Records and Information Section of CAPA, 2018 
With data collated from the Versadex  Records Management System (RMS), it was noted 
that between the years 2012 through 2017 there were 2 ,940 incidences of fraud  (see Table 1) . 
The year 2016 saw the most reported cases of this offence with a total of 1,031. This was a 74% 
increase from the previou s year which saw 592  cases being reported. There was also a decrease 
of 45% between 2017 and 2016. Over the course of this six year period Southern Division was 
responsible for the most reports (577) while Sou th Western Division recorded the least (120). 
With only two exceptions, fraud increased between 2012 and 2016 according to the present data 
collected from the RMS. Eastern and Tobago D ivisions saw decrease s of approximately 17% 
(South Western Division stayed stagnant between these two years ). All divisions saw decreases 
in recorded incidents of fr aud between 2016 and 2017. Port -of-Spain and Central Divisions saw 
the steepest declines during this period with  decreases of 60% and 57% respectively.  Out of the 
POLICE 
DIVISIONS 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 Grand Total 
SOUTHERN 48 53 42 59 227 148 577 
NORTHERN 50 61 36 101 198 97 543 
PORT OF SPAIN 21 51 43 126 188 76 505 
CENTRAL 35 64 25 78 159 68 429 
NORTH 
EASTERN 16 25 24 49 65 36 215 
EASTERN 12 9 20 61 51 47 200 
TOBAGO 20 16 11 59 49 25 180 
WESTERN 11 18 14 28 63 37 171 
SOUTHERN 
WESTERN 6 10 8 31 31 34 120 
Grand Total 219 307 223 592 1031 568 2940 



16 
 
nine Divisions, there were ten stations th at stood out across the six year period.  Central Police 
Station accounted for the highest number of reports during this time with 385 while the lowest of 
the top ten was Barataria with 93. Northern Division had three station districts within the top ten 
stations for fraud offences (Arouca, Arima and Tunapuna). 
Table 2: Top Ten Stations Districts for Fraud Reports in Trinidad and Tobago, 2012 to 2017 
Source: Crime Records and Information Section of CAPA, 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STATION DISTRICT 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 Grand Total 
CENTRAL POLICE STATION  62 128 103 35 42 15 385 
SAN FERNANDO  89 135 34 17 29 19 323 
CHAGUANAS  31 68 40 12 37 12 200 
AROUCA  37 53 18 4 11 10 133 
ARIMA  16 43 25 9 13 14 120 
COUVA  22 46 18 3 19 9 117 
TUNAPUNA  10 59 16 5 15 6 111 
SCARBOROUGH  15 29 34 8 10 9 105 
SANGRE GRANDE  13 28 48 6 4 3 102 
BARATARIA  15 18 23 14 19 4 93 
Grand Total 310 607 359 113 199 101 1689 



17 
 
Table 3: Top Ten Fraud Offences in Trinidad and Tobago, 2012 to 2017 
Source: Crime Records and Information Section of CAPA, 2018 
Fraud as mentioned earlier is an umbrella term  and covers many different offences. For the six 
year period, Fraudulent Conversion was the most prevalent fraud offence with 629 reports. This 
was followed by Obtaining Mone y by False Pretences (414), Larceny by a Trick (377), Forgery 
ID/ ABM/ Credit Cards (309) and Uttering Forged Documents (300).  
 
 
 
 
 
FRAUD CATEGORY 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 Grand Total 
FRAUD.CONVERSION 21 (1) 
(c) 
99 249 166 40 52 23 629 
OBTAIN MONEY BY FALSE 
PRETENCES 
109 141 85 22 43 14 414 
LARCENY BY A TRICK 80 64 85 35 53 60 377 
FORGERY ID / ABM / CREDIT 
CARDS 
2 210 39 30 28 0 309 
UTTERING FORGED 
DOCUMENT 
54 104 51 28 25 38 300 
LARCENY CLERK/SERVANT 
11:12 18 
49 41 45 30 35 32 232 
OBTAIN GOODS BY FALSE 
PRETENCE 
19 47 32 5 14 14 131 
OBTAIN 
GOODS(WORTHLESS 
CHEQUE) 
18 51 15 1 7 1 93 
FORGERY(NOT CURRENCY 
NOTES) 
26 13 13 1 14 2 69 
FORGERY OF DEED/BOND 
11:13 4.1 
12 18 22 1 5 1 59 
Grand Total 468 938 553 193 276 185 2613 



18 
 
Section 3  
Relationship between Fraud and Money Laundering in Trinidad and Tobago 
 
The term ‘predicate offences’ includes a very extensive range of unlawful activities, the 
proceeds of which, once involved in a subject transaction, can lead to conviction for money 
laundering. With regards to money laundering, the FATF encourages countries to have very clear 
definitions of money laundering predicate offences as well as  designated categories of predicate 
offences for money laundering . In most anti -money laundering legislation, there is a listing 
and/or broad definition of these types of crimes. Some examples of predicate offences for money 
laundering are drug trafficking, human trafficking, bribery and extortion. While the Proceeds of 
Crime Act (2000) does entail a definition of  money laundering, there are no designated 
categories or definitions in relation to predicate offences for money laundering. Therefore, the 
aim of this section is to examine the relationship between fraud and money laundering in 
Trinidad and Tobago. 
 Within the TTPS, there are t hree specialized units that investigate money laundering 
offences; the Financial Intelligence Branch (FIB), the Anti-Corruption and Investigations Bureau 
(ACIB) and the Fraud Squad . Additionally, the Financial Intelligence Unit of Trinidad and 
Tobago (FIUTT) has been formed to implement anti -money laundering and counter terrorist  
financing policies as well as to analyze reports and information from financial institutions.  
Drawing on data from the FIB,  the FIUTT found that there  were 27 persons c harged with 359 
money laundering charges between 2012 and February 21 st, 2018 (see Table 4). The total value 
of the char ges were inclusive of  different currencies; TT$21,035,719.41, US$41,856.0 0, 
CA$1,070.00, GBP £5.00, EC $2,625.00, $44,172.00 Bolivars $100,000.00 Paraguayan, 
$1,300.00 Korean, $150.00 Barbados and $100.00 Yuan. It should be noted that these represent 
only the cases that are before the Courts, not those currently under investigation or the ‘dark 
figure’ that is, those not yet discovered or unreported.  
Out of the total number of charges , almost two-thirds (2/3) listed fraud  offences as the 
predicate offence s, accounting for 64% of the total number of charges for  the period. Further 



19 
 
analysis reveals that money laundering charges with fraud as the predicate offences amounted to 
TT$14.7 million, which was 70% of the total value of charges in TT dollars.  One person was  
also charged jointly with money laundering and fraud offences. Moreover, an examination of the 
money laundering charges provided by the Fraud Squad data has indicated that this department 
has brought 177 money laundering charges against persons between 2011 and 2017. In 2016, 
there were 155 charges, which was the highest number for the 7 -year period. These data are 
significant as they strongly suggest that fraud offences are one of the primary criminal activities 
that results in money laundering in Trinidad and Tobago. Secondly, as predicate offences, fraud-
related activities entail significant quantities of money being transacted in such a way to conceal, 
disguise, convert or otherwise obscure its criminal origins.  The relative prevalence and the 
magnitude of cash involved , points to critical weaknesses in the anti-money laundering 
legislative framework, as well as  deficiencies in regulations and policies  in the local financial 
systems. Finally, investigations into fraud -related crimes should be given particular attention to 
determine if money laundering  has also occurred. Since money laundering is a secondary crime 
that is used to cover up predicate offences (that is, the initial criminal conduct), investigators of 
fraud offences must scrutinize these cases meticulously to uncover any possible paper trails and 
activities related to money laundering.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



20 
 
Table 4: 
Reports of Money Laundering and Predicate Offences in Trinidad and Tobago, 2012 to 2017 
 
Source: Financial Investigation Unit Trinidad and Tobago website - https://www.fiu.gov.tt 
 
 
 




21 
 
Section 4  
Challenges to Anti-Fraud and Anti-Money Laundering Efforts in Trinidad and Tobago 
 
With regards to money laundering, there are many obstacles that would stand in the way 
of the various AML groups that have been established and charged with infiltration of  offenders 
throughout the world, let alone the Re public of Trinidad and Tobago. Money l aundering is a 
versatile offence , involving a large number  of players and encompassing  a wide range of 
predicate offences. This makes identification, prosecution and conviction of this type of crime 
especially difficult for law enforcement agencies.  The following are challenges in combatting 
money laundering in Trinidad and Tobago, partly drawn from the CFATF (2016) Report on anti -
money laundering and counter-terrorist financing measures: 
Insufficient Legislative Framework 
The Proceeds of Crime Act h as defined the offence of money laundering in Trinidad and 
Tobago. However, it does not include a list of specific predicate offences for money laundering, 
as recommended in the 2003 revision of the FATF 40. Thus, linking money laundering to a 
specific set  of predicate offences for investigation and prosecution is challenging for law 
enforcement.  
Low Priority of Money Laundering by Law Enforcement  
The FIB, ACIB and the Fraud Squad are the main units in the TTPS that are responsible 
for investigating money laundering offences, eith er as a result of a fraud -related offence or as a 
stand-alone offence . Although the numbers of arrests, for money laundering offences and 
specifically those with fraud related predi cates have increased, the actual number of convict ions 
remains low. Given that Trinidad and Tobago is considered high -risk for money laundering and  
being cogni zant of  the tremendous costs involved, the offence and its predicates are not 
prioritized accordingly by law enforcement agencies.   
 
 



22 
 
Inadequate Implementation of Preventative Measures  
There has been inefficient implementation of the regulations that govern financial 
institutions, non -bank financial institutions and designated non -financial businesses an d 
professions. Utilizing a risk -based approach, ensuring customer due diligence (CDD), enhanced 
due diligence (EDD), compliance procedures and other safeguards are not applied as consistently 
or stringently as they should.  
No Confiscation of Unexplained Wealth/ Assets 
At present, Trinidad and Tobago  does not have any law or policy regarding the 
confiscation of assets from unexplained sources of wealth in the context of mo ney laundering or 
any of its pr edicate offences.  As the legislation currently stands, there is no provision for non -
conviction bas ed confiscation (civil forfeiture). Therefore, criminals have the opportunity to 
move or restructure their assets before investigators can complete their process. 
Lack of Training for Anti-Money Laundering Investigation and Prosecution 
Effective investigat ion and prosecution of money laundering offences as  well as its 
predicates require law enforcement officers to be trained specifically in these areas. This in turn 
should result in an increase in the number of arrests in a timely  fashion, shorter period of  
investigation as well as more convictions in Court. 
Inconsistent Recording of Money Laundering Offences on RMS 
There are money laundering charges initiated by some of the specialized sections which 
were not entered into the Records Management Systems (RMS), the official database used by the 
TTPS. These units collected and collated data on fraud an d money laundering offences 
independently, most of which ar e not present on the RMS. I t is noteworthy that these units have 
sought to ensure detailed statistics w ere collected on their respective investigations . However , 
placing these on the RMS is also crucial for timely and accurate  analysis of the official data. 
Additionally, the failure of these units to comply with D.O. 254/06 present s challenges for 
strategic decision-making, multi-lateral and bi-lateral national security agreements. 
 



23 
 
Gap between Occurred Date and Reported Date of Money Laundering Offences 
Another challenge lay in the difference between the date when the incident occurred  as 
opposed to the da te the incident was reported to the police . For example, a fraud or money 
laundering offence may have occurred in 2012 but may not have been reported to authorities 
until 2015. Alternatively, investigation into a fraud offence may also result in a money 
laundering offence being detected in a subsequent year by investigators.  In either case, the 
offence would be placed in the year it was reported rather than the year it occurred . This 
inconsistency was often attributed to the lengthy and often problematic process of investigation, 
as gathering of evidence could take month s or even years to be completed, which also does not 
help with the T.T.P.S.’ crime analytical and predictive analysis work. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



24 
 
Section 5  
Conclusion 
In conclusion, it has been made apparent that there has been a considerable amount of 
work done by the various specialized sections of the TTPS since the introduction of the FIUTT 
with regards to the  detection of money l aundering and the identification of predicate offences, 
especially fraud. Detection of money laundering offences increased by four times the amount, 
from 219 in 2012 to 1,031 in 2016. This increase was due to the fact that prior to 2011, there was 
no legislation defining money laundering as an offence . Subsequent to this increase, there was a 
significant decrease (45%) where the total figure moved from 1,031 in 2016 to 568 in 2017. This 
decrease could possibly be credited to the fact that the high detection rate in 2016 sent a message 
to potential offenders and acted as a d eterrent to desist . There is a clear relationship between 
fraud and money laundering in Trinidad and Tobago; fraud is the most prevalent predicate 
offence for money laundering.  
Recommendations 
This paper was conducted with the intention of examining the r elationship between 
money laundering and fraud in Trinidad and Tobago . It also aimed to reveal the prevalence of 
fraud and money laundering in Trinidad and Tobago between 2012 and 2017 . This section 
provides recommendations which would assist in creating  better policies and infrastructure to 
counter money laundering and fraud as a predicate offence.   
Implementation of Civil Forfeiture Legislation 
  Arising out of the judicial process with reference to fraud and mo ney laundering related 
offences, a noted shortcoming experienced by officers pro ffering charges against offenders was 
that of insufficient powers for the police with the current laws. Presently, any type of 
confiscation proceedings is not possible unless money laundering is linked to a specific off ence. 
The absence of such legislation l imits the power of inves tigators and ultimately cripples  some 
investigations with regards to seizure of cash and assets of persons suspected of committing 
fraud and money laundering offences. Various countries, inclusive of our Caribbean neighbours 



25 
 
St. Vincent and Jamaica, are currently in compliance with the recommendations of the FATF and 
have implemented an act called the Civil Forfeiture Act . This allows non -conviction based 
confiscation of cash and/or assets of pe rsons suspected of money laundering, its predicate 
offences or where there are sources of unexplained wealth.  Implementation of legislation which 
grants similar powers to local law enforcement is recommended. 
Implementation of Unexplained Wealth Orders (UWOs) 
According to Minty (2018), Unexplained Wealth Orders or UWOs are orders requiring a 
person (“the respondent”) to provide a statement setting out the nature and extent of their interest 
in a particular property. The statement must explain how the interest in that property was funded, 
and the respondent may also be required to provide further information or documents. 
Additionally, failure to comply with the UWO within the specified time of the order will lead to 
the property in question being presumed to be recoverable by law enforcement as the proceeds of 
crime in civil recovery proceedings. The burden is then on the respondent to prove the contrary.  
In light of the extent of fraud and money laundering in Trinidad and Tobago, it is recommended 
that legislation similar to Unexplained Wealth Orders (UWOs) be implemented. 
Consolidation of Workspace 
It was observed during the course of data collection that the various agencies within the 
TTPS that deal with fraud and money l aundering offences are housed in se parate buildings. 
Additionally, there is a distinct tendency for these units to function with relatively little 
collaboration among them. Depending on the details of an  investigation into fraud and/or money 
laundering, this can pose challenges to the vario us agencies  with re gards to who should 
investigate it, communication and information sharing . Consolidation of all of the offices 
involved, into a single building or space as well as coordinated and sh ared policies for 
communication is recommended. P olicies and procedures can  allow for smoother and more 
improved processes in law enforcement.  
Mandatory Filing of SAR for Designated Non-Financial Businesses and Professions  
Designated Non-Financial Business or Profession (DNFBP) according to the FATF will 
fall into one of the following categories; casinos, real estate agents, dealers in precious metals, 
dealers in precious stones, (jewellers) lawyers, notaries, other legal profession als and 
accountants. At present, there is no legislation or regulation that mandates any of these 



26 
 
businesses or professions to file a Suspicious Activity Report (SAR) where they may suspect any 
of their customers or clients of being involved in any form of money laundering. There is need to 
closely monitor these businesses and profe ssions more closely as they present an opport unity for 
achieving success in money laundering. This, however, is one of the FATF 40 recommendations 
and as such is recommended for implementation into our laws. 
Anti-money Laundering Training Programs for Law Enforcement 
Training for l aw enforcement officers in Trinidad and Tobago must be conducted to 
emphasize the impo rtance of their AML efforts, investigations and prosecutions. Training will 
also educate the officers about the laws, regulations, procedures an d best practices in AML. 
Officers can also become more cognizant of the predicate offences for money laundering and the 
red flags to look out for during investigations. Training programs should include topics like the 
history and background of money launde ring, definition of money laundering, AML regulations 
and legislation, actual money laundering schemes (pattern of activity, how it was detected, and 
predicate offences). Training should be tailored to the officers’ specific roles and should also 
include either formal or informal refresher training.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



27 
 
References 
Association of Certified Anti -Money Laundering Specialist  (ACAMS). 2012. CAMS 
Certification Guide. Miami: ACAMS.  
 
Association of Certified Fraud Examiners (ACFE). 2012. Fraud Examiners Manu al 2012 US 
Edition. Texas: ACFE.  
 
Caribbean Financial Action Task Force (CFATF). 2016. Anti-money laundering and count er-
terrorist financing measures, Trinidad and Tobago Mutual Evaluation Report.  
 
Financial Action Task Force (FATF)/ Organisation for Eco nomic Co -operation and 
Development (OECD). 2010. FATF 40 Recommendations: October 2003. France: FATF 
 
Financial Action Task Force (FATF)/ Organisation for Economic Co -operation and 
Development (OECD). 2012. International Standards on Combating Money Launde ring and the 
Financing of Terrorism & Proliferation. France: FATF 
 
Lehman, Jeffrey and Shirelle Phelps. 2005. West's encyclopedia of American law. Detroit: 
Thomson/Gale. 
 
Minty, Gareth. “Unexplained Wealth Orders  now in force. ” 2018. Mishcon de Reya Newsle tter 
Accessed March 27, 2018. https://www.mishcon.com/news/briefings/unexplained-wealth-orders-
now-in-force  
 
Uribe, Rodolfo. 2003. “Changing paradigms on money l aundering” The Observer News, Inter -
American Observatory on Drugs. Accessed March 16, 2018. 
http://www.cicad.oas.org/oid/NEW/Information/Observer/Observer2_2003/MLParadigms.pdf  
 