 
1 | P a g e  
 
TTPS EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT        
SYLLABUS                JULY 2022 
 
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO POLICE SERVICE 
 
SECOND DIVISION  
 
EXAMINATION SYLLABUS  
 
 
FOR THE RANKS OF  
 
 
 INSPECTORS 
 SERGEANTS 
 CORPORALS 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
July 2022 
 
Police Service Examination Board 
  



 
2 | P a g e  
 
TTPS EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT        
SYLLABUS                JULY 2022 
Contents 
Background ................................................................................................................................................ 3 
Syllabus Underpinnings .......................................................................................................................... 3 
Assessment Criteria .................................................................................................................................. 5 
Skills and Abilities ............................................................................................................................... 5 
Assessment Forms ................................................................................................................................. 6 
Scheme of the Examination ................................................................................................................. 6 
Content Standards .................................................................................................................................... 7 
Additional Notes ....................................................................................................................................... 9 
1. Contextual Perspectives ................................................................................................................... 9 
2. Philosophical Approaches ............................................................................................................. 10 
3. Functions of Management ............................................................................................................. 11 
4. Managing Relations with Stakeholders ..................................................................................... 13 
5. Other Key Concepts ........................................................................................................................ 14 
Preparation For Examination ................................................................................................................ 15 
Tips on Writing Examinations .......................................................................................................... 15 
Tips on Responding to Different Question Formats. .................................................................. 16 
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQs) .............................................................................................. 16 
True-False Questions ....................................................................................................................... 17 
Essay-Type Questions. .................................................................................................................... 17 
Short Answer Questions (SAQs) .................................................................................................... 20 
Mini/Micro Case Study Questions (MCSQs) .............................................................................. 20 
Sample Questions ................................................................................................................................... 22 
Instructions:.......................................................................................................................................... 22 
Section 1 Multiple Choice Questions (1 mark each) ....................................................................... 23 
Section 2 Mini-Cases (10 -15 marks each) ........................................................................................ 28 
Section 3 Essay-Type Questions (20-40 marks) ............................................................................... 31 
Model Answers with Mark Scheme .................................................................................................... 32 
Section 1: Multiple Choice .................................................................................................................. 32 
Section 2: Mini-cases ............................................................................................................................ 33 
Section 3 Essay-Type Questions ......................................................................................................... 37 
 



 
3 | P a g e  
 
TTPS EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT        
SYLLABUS                JULY 2022 
Background 
In accordance with the strategic direction of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service, the 
Commissioner of Police has mandated the Police Service Examination Board (PSEB) to reform 
the current examination regime which is in use in the Second Division of the TTPS. The 
following changes have been adopted: 
 
i. A revision of curriculum with the purpose of developing, a modern candidate friendly 
syllabi. 
ii. The incorporation of examination components that reflect the demands of the current 
job descriptions of the ranks from Corporal to Inspector in the Second Division as well 
as the new and pressing demands on the modern Police Service. 
iii. The administration of examinations in form ats which allow comprehensive 
assessment of required knowledge, skills, and abilities. 
 
In alignment with this mandate, the subject area Management: Second Division (M:SD) is 
presented in this syllabus. It provides a comprehensive set of content standards.  The set 
draws from general management topics in a modular format that makes it relevant to the 
police service. The objective of the M:SD is to formalize and provide boundaries to the process 
by which candidates will demonstrate the knowledge, skills and a bilities needed to operate 
at each of the promotional levels in the Second Division of the TTPS. The underlying 
assumption is that familiarity with the topics of this Syllabus will enable the successful officer 
to perform in all the functional and implied responsibilities of the rank for which they are 
being assessed. Highly skilled, talented and knowledgeable Police Officers will be prepared 
to meet the challenges and opportunities of their respective jobs as well as managing the 
human resources under their jurisdiction. Finally, this syllabus is designed to promote a more 
student-centered approach to instruction and to support self -study in preparation for 
assessment. 
Syllabus Underpinnings 
The organisation and content of the M:SD is shaped by the nature and structure of the subject 
matter to be learnt.  There is an attempt to recognise the dynamic and evolving nature of the 
internal and the external environment in which Police Officers are required to operate. This 
means that the subject matter covered is reality -based, and takes into consideration the 
guiding philosophy and culture of the organisation. The M:SD must respond to changes in 
the strategic direction of the organisation, cohere wi th new social and cultural imperatives, 
and keep up with legislative and administrative protocols as they arise. As such, this M:SD is 
deemed to be current for the period 2022-2025 and will be subject to review thereafter.  



 
4 | P a g e  
 
TTPS EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT        
SYLLABUS                JULY 2022 
However, there are three major c urriculum underpinnings that are expected to remain 
constant. These are the constructivist approach to learning, the identification of essential 
outcomes from learning and the importance of English Language skills in learning the subject 
of Police Duties.  
 
These principles are discussed briefly below. 
The constructivist 
approach to learning 
In constructivism, the learner uses prior academic knowledge 
as well as personal experience to learn well. The police officer 
should therefore approach learning by actively and mindfully 
engaging with the material; putting the information into a 
context, creating and interrogating possible scenarios and 
seeing that knowledge of key terms, strategies, principles, 
rules, and protocols included in this syllabus can inform 
solutions to real-life problems in policing. Finally, the 
constructivist believes that motivation is a key component in 
learning and therefore the increasing responsibility of the role 
of the Corporal, Sergeant or Inspector should be enough of an 
impetus for a sincere effort at covering the M:SD 
 
The essential learning 
outcomes  
Excellent problem -solving and communication skills are 
deemed essential outcomes of engaging with the M:SD. Police 
Officers are called, individually and collaboratively, to 
distinguish facts from opinions, ask questions, observe, make 
inferences, and draw conclusions. Skills in oral and written 
communication modes are necessary for the police officer to 
demonstrate understanding of facts and relationships, present 
information and instructions with clarity and conciseness and 
demonstrate sensitivity and empathy in behaviour and speech 
where necessary.  
 
The importance of 
English Language in 
learning and assessment 
The language skills of reading and writing are very important 
in completing this syllabus and being ready for assessment. 
Reading requires the ability to interpret the vocabulary used, 
extract relevant information (analysis), reconstruct the 
message and respond with reasonable judgement. You should 
be able to read both long and short pieces of text intensively; 
looking for key words and phrases and making links with 
other pieces of information which you read before.  Writing 
demonstrates your ability to think logically, organise your 
thoughts, recognize and use appropriate words, terms or 



 
5 | P a g e  
 
TTPS EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT        
SYLLABUS                JULY 2022 
jargon.  Good writing allows assessors to understand your 
approach and stay interested in your arguments 
Assessment Criteria 
Skills and Abilities 
Determining whether a candidate has gained the required knowledge, skills and abilities 
needed will be the purpose of the summative examination. It would be useful if the learner 
undertakes self-assessments to know how much has been learnt along the way. The skills and 
abilities that candidates are expected to demonstrate on completion of this syllabus have been 
grouped under three (3) headings. The relevant criteria by which attainment will be judged 
are set out below: - 
Skills and abilities Criteria - The examination will test candidates’ skills and 
ability to 
 
Knowledge and 
Comprehension 
1. list basic functions of the management role 
2. identify relevant facts and concepts as they relate to 
management scenarios; 
3. identify real-life situations or challenges for which 
management solutions are appropriate and practical. 
 
Application and 
Analysis 
1. apply concepts to various scenarios in the management 
environment; 
2. separate elements of scenarios into component parts for the 
application of managerial solutions; 
3. assess the likely outcomes of management decisions on 
subordinates. 
 
Evaluation and Problem 
Solving 
1. select and use facts, operating procedures and 
management concepts appropriately in problem 
solving and decision making; 
2. provide advice and make judgements based on the 
appropriate protocols, industrial agreements, and 
information gained from the study of management; 
3. evaluate situations and provide suitable solutions or 
advice using managerial concepts and 
understandings  
4. justify and apply appropriate techniques of problem-
solving and decision-making in the management 
environment. 
 



 
6 | P a g e  
 
TTPS EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT        
SYLLABUS                JULY 2022 
 
Assessment Forms 
The M:SD syllabus is written to be used by all candidates for the three ranks in the Second 
Division, however, the complexity of assessment strategies will increase according to the rank 
being assessed. The summative examination for a particular rank will contain a judicious mix 
of objective and subjective type questions ranging from multiple choice questions, short 
answer questions, micro/mini-case studies to questions requiring responses in the form of 
essays. 
 
Scheme of the Examination 
Each M:SD Examination will consist of three Sections. Section 1 will consist of multiple choice, 
true/false or short answer questions based on any topic in the entire syllabus. Section 2 will 
consist of case studies which focus on no more than 2 subject areas. A case study may be either 
micro (150-200-word passage) or mini (400-500-word passage).  Each passage will be followed 
by 3-5 questions. Section 3 will consist of essay questions out of which candidates will be 
expected to write between one to two responses. Each essay should be no few er than 250 
words. In addition to content, essays will be assessed for correct use of the English language, 
in particular, verb agreement, punctuation, spelling and vocabulary use.  
The table below sets out the mix of question types to be administered according to 
promotional rank in the Second Division. 
Rank Section 1 Section 2 Section 3 Time 
allocation 
Corporal 30 multiple-
choice and/or 
true/false 
questions 
(1 mark each) 
Two case studies  
(15 marks each) 
One essay from 
choice of three topics  
(40 marks) 
2½ hours  
Sergeant 20 multiple-
choice and/or 
true/false or 
short answer 
questions  
(Total - 30 marks) 
Two case studies  
(15 marks each) 
Two essays from 
choice of four topics  
(20 marks each) 
3 hours  
Inspector 10 true/false 
questions (1 
mark each) 
5 short answer 
questions  
(4 marks each) 
Three case studies  
(10 marks each) 
Two essays from 
choice of four topics  
(20 marks each) 
3 hours  



 
7 | P a g e  
 
TTPS EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT        
SYLLABUS                JULY 2022 
Content Standards 
 
The content standards of the M:SD combine a basic knowledge and understanding of 
management concepts, principles, practices, and skills that ought to govern the human and 
operational interactions within the context of the policing environment. It is expected that the 
middle managers in the Second Division will attain contextual and strategic mana gerial 
perspectives and the critical thinking skills of analysis, evaluation, decision making and 
problem-solving. The questions in the examinations will test candidates’ knowledge and 
understanding of management duties within a police unit, section or sta tion as well as 
management of police relationships with the community in its many forms. The areas, sub -
areas and sources of information where relevant are listed below: - 
  
1. Managerial perspectives 
2. Philosophical approaches to police management 
3. Functions of management 
4. Managing relations with stakeholders 
5. Other key concepts 
 
Additional notes on concepts and principles of police management are provided to support 
candidates’ readiness for examination. Valuable reference sources include: 
 
1. The current Trinidad and Tobago Police Service Strategic Plan 
2. Cordner, G. W. (2016) Police Administration, Routledge 
3. Any introductory management text. 
 
 
 Areas Sub-areas Details 
1. Managerial 
perspectives 
The contextual 
perspective 
 Social context of policing 
 Political context of policing 
 Legal context of policing 
 Organisational context of policing  
2 Philosophical 
approaches to 
police management 
Theories, 
perspectives and 
models used in 
police 
management 
 
 
 
 Theories 
 Competencies in policing 
      professionalism vs communalism 
 Models of policing 
      Professional, strategic crime-fighting,  
       problem-solving, intelligence-led 
 Elements of TTPS Strategic Plan 
      Vision, Mission, Mandate, Oath, Shared 
      Values,  Goals and Objectives 



 
8 | P a g e  
 
TTPS EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT        
SYLLABUS                JULY 2022 
3 Functions of 
management 
Leading  The importance/benefits of good leadership 
 Leadership styles and sources of power  
 Leadership Roles 
 Leadership knowledge and skills 
o Technical 
o Conceptual 
o Diagnostic and Analytical 
o Interpersonal/Human resource perspective 
o Theories of motivation Maslow, Herzberg 
  Planning Nature and importance/benefits of planning  
o Steps in planning  
o Limitations of planning 
  Decision-making Meaning and importance/benefits of decision-
making 
o Types of decisions  
o Factors affecting decision-making 
o Stages in the decision-making process  
o Essential features of good decision-making  
o The importance and limitations of qualitative 
and quantitative research in decision-making 
  Organising  Meaning and importance/benefits of organising 
o Harnessing, coordinating resources 
o Approaches/principles of organizing/ co-
ordination  
o Importance of record-keeping 
  Controlling Meaning and importance/benefits of controlling 
o Process of controlling – measuring 
performance against standards, taking 
corrective action  
o Performance appraisal techniques (monitoring 
and evaluation) 
o  Discipline 
o Conflict management process and steps in 
resolution 
  Communication Meaning and importance of Communication –  
o the communication process. 
o guidelines to effective communication e.g. use 
of formal and informal channels 
o barriers to effective communication 
4 Managing relations 
with stakeholders 
Stakeholder 
groups 
 Identification of stakeholder and partnering 
groups 



 
9 | P a g e  
 
TTPS EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT        
SYLLABUS                JULY 2022 
 Features of stakeholder and partnering groups 
 Stakeholder/community and partner relations 
management 
 Social Media management 
5. Other key concepts Change 
Management 
 
 Meaning and importance of change management 
 Evaluation exercises, dissemination methods, 
readiness for change 
  Time 
management 
 Meaning and importance of time management 
 Benefits of managing time well 
 Strategies to manage time for efficiency and 
effectiveness 
  Work-Life 
balance 
 Meaning and importance of work-life balance 
 Stressors that reduce work-life balance 
 Strategies to achieve work-life balance 
  Ethical 
considerations 
 Ethical culture 
 Ethical challenges 
 Solutions to ethical dilemmas  
 
Additional Notes 
1. Contextual Perspectives 
 Social context  – diverse nature of society, dynamic nature of societal priorities and 
expectations, assessing community impact, relations with linked societal services 
(prisons, judiciary, army, fire, government services) 
 
 Political context – underlying philosophy of apolitical nature of policing (control by 
government of the day through existing laws and regulations), role of national security 
priorities, role of budgetary allocations  
 
 Legal context – criminal and constitutional laws, Police Service Act Chapter 15:01, police 
service regulations, other guiding regulations, legislative change impacts. 
 
 Organisational context - The police service as an organisation - historical and military 
background and purposes, bureaucratic nature ( hierarchy, chain of command, span of 
control, line and staff relationship, responsibility, authority, accountability, 
centralisation, decentralisation , delegation), the nature and purpose of police work 
(crime control, maintenance of order, social service) 
 



 
10 | P a g e  
 
TTPS EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT        
SYLLABUS                JULY 2022 
2. Philosophical Approaches 
Theories of Management – knowledge of organizational principles and features that are 
considered for successful management 
 
 Scientific – outline policies and procedures thoroughly, use scientific method to make 
decisions, assign personnel to division of work in line with their capacities, train 
personnel thoroughly, supervise closely (N.B. limitation – insufficient attention paid to 
human needs) 
 
 Administrative – 14 guiding principles (initiative, equity, scalar chain, proper 
remuneration, unity of direction, disciplined environment, division of work, authority 
and responsibility, unity of command, subordination of individual interest, 
centralisation, order, stability of tenure, esprit de corps a.k.a team spirit) (N.B. examine 
benefits and limitations e.g. some principles outside of middle management scope) 
 
 Systems Theory – view the management unit as an open, complex, social system 
comprised of inter -acting and inter -dependent sub-systems (units, stations, divisions, 
specialist bureaus, individuals); the systems graphic of inputs, processes, outputs and 
feedback; harmonious working; effects of change in systems management.  
 
 X or Y Theory and Theory Z – manager’s perspectives on the subordinate and the 
culture of the organisation will affect management style and success; theoretical 
attitudes of Theory X individuals and Theory Y individuals to the job of policing; the 
relevance of Theory Z; identification of desired culture for the police organisation at 
various levels - commonality of beliefs, values and objectives; effect of organizational 
culture change. 
 
Competencies in Policing 
 Professionalism (decision-making strength, establishment and enforcement of policies 
in and human relations, formality, impartiality, accountability, efficiency, effectiveness 
 Communalism (use of common sense, good judgement, experiential knowledge, 
negotiation skills, innovative thinking, communication skills, emotional intelligence) 
 
Models of policing  
 Professional 
o emphasizes crime control,  
o stresses knowledge of the law and regulations, and standards of behaviour,  
o relies on training and technology 
o utilizes traditional measures of crime-fighting  
 Strategic Crime-Fighting 



 
11 | P a g e  
 
TTPS EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT        
SYLLABUS                JULY 2022 
o emphasizes crime control,  
o stresses knowledge of the law and regulations, and standards of behaviour,  
o relies on training and technology 
o places focus on types of crime and responds with targeted techniques 
 Problem-solving 
o emphasizes crime control,  
o stresses knowledge of the law and regulations, and standards of behaviour,  
o relies on training and technology 
o places focus on types of crime and responds with targeted techniques 
o considers non-crime control police functions e.g. increasing sense of security in 
the population, dispute resolution 
o assigns resources to problem identif ication and prevention, education, 
mediation, partnering with supplementary services 
 Additional models:  
o Community – police know and are well known by their community and both 
share responsibility for crime control. Community norms and values are taken 
into police discretionary application of law enforcement. 
o Intelligence-led – deploys resources based on systematic and continuous analysis 
of information about the criminal environment (strengths, weaknesses, 
opportunities and threats [SWOT])  
 
 Elements of Strategic Plan  
o Vision,  
o Mission,  
o Mandate,  
o Oath,  
o Shared Values,  
o Goals and Objectives  
 
3. Functions of Management 
 Leading 
o The importance of good leadership 
o Leadership styles and sources of power (autocratic/directive, 
transactional/exchange, situational/discretionary/contingency, 
transformational/charismatic/trait, servant) 
o Leadership roles (Interpersonal, Informational, Decisional) 
o Leadership knowledge and skills:  
- Technical (D .O. 64 2001/Job D escriptions, Police Duties, Relevant laws , 
Industrial Agreements) 
- Conceptual (understands cause and effect relationships, takes a holistic view) 



 
12 | P a g e  
 
TTPS EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT        
SYLLABUS                JULY 2022 
- Diagnostic and Analytical (discerns symptoms, recognize key issue/s, select 
best operational strategy) 
- Interpersonal/ Human resource perspective (roles and resp onsibilities of 
leader and subordinate, team -building strategies and skills, 
mentoring/coaching, workforce diversity awareness, identification of 
training needs and training activities, health and safety considerations, 
succession-planning) 
- Theories of motivation (Maslow, Herzberg) 
 
 Planning 
o Nature and importance of planning (link to purposes, goals and objectives, 
futuristic viewpoint, preventative nature, avoiding crisis situations, knowledge -
based, project management principles (time, scope, cost) 
o Types of plans – operational, tactical, strategic, specific, directional  
o Steps in planning - the preparedness cycle, environmental analysis (external, 
internal), goal formulation, action plan establishment, allocation of resources plan, 
implementation plan, control and feedback action plan 
o Barriers and limitations of planning - insufficient or inaccurate environmental 
information, lack of organizational knowledge, resistance to change, costs, lack of 
organizational commitment 
 Decision-Making 
o Meaning and importance of decision-making -  
o Types of decisions (Programmed and non-programmed) 
o Factors affecting decisions (legal, social, resource availability - technological, 
personnel, equipment, personal constraints) 
o Stages in the decision -making process (data collection – importance and sources; 
analysis and evaluation, formulation of alternative strategies; implementation; 
evaluation) 
o Essential features of good decision-making (accuracy, timeliness, planning quality, 
cost effectiveness) 
o The importance and limitations of qualitative and quantitative research in decision-
making 
 
 Organising 
o Meaning and importance of organising – coordination, structure, orderliness, 
authority levels 
o Principles of coordination (unit of command, scalar chain, span of control)  
o Approaches to organising (Use of information technology (advantages and 
challenges), centralisation, decentralisation, delegation and deployment strategies 
o Importance of record-keeping  



 
13 | P a g e  
 
TTPS EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT        
SYLLABUS                JULY 2022 
 Controlling 
o Establishing performance standards/Expected results 
o Applying emotional intelligence 
o Using performance appraisal techniques (monitoring and evaluation),  
o Taking corrective action 
o Managing conflict (recognize/acknowledge existence of conflict, assess level and 
type of conflict and results, determine/discuss source of conflict, examine possible 
solution (confront, resolve -compromise, accommodate, maintain - avoid 
resolution, stimulate) 
o Utilising disciplinary processes and procedures 
 Communication  
o The communication process (Sender – source or authority, encoding/message 
composition, Channel/medium -choices, advantages, disadvantages, Receiver – 
decoding/message interpretation, Feedback) 
o Communication flows – levels of authority, vertical (upward, downward), 
horizontal (lateral), illustration using headed arrows 
o Guidelines to effective communication e.g. clear purpose, completeness and 
conciseness, verbal and non -verbal cues, use of formal and informal channels, 
knowledge of participants in the process 
o Barriers to effective communication – psychological, emotional, noise, distractions, 
misinformation, disinformation, dissatisfaction, disinterest, inattention/inactive 
listening, differences in communication styles. 
 
4. Managing Relations with Stakeholders 
 Identification of stakeholder and partnering groups 
o Specialist police departments 
o Judiciary 
o Prisons Service 
o Defence Force 
o Fire 
o Government agencies 
o Community groups 
o General Public 
 Features of stakeholder and partnering groups 
 Stakeholder and partner relations management 
o Strategies for development of good stakeholder and partner relations 
o Implications of a stakeholder/partner focus 
o Monitoring and evaluating stakeholder/partner/programmes 
 Social media management  -definition, skills, common social media platforms, 



 
14 | P a g e  
 
TTPS EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT        
SYLLABUS                JULY 2022 
managerial benefits and limitations 
 
5. Other Key Concepts 
 Change management 
o Defining change management 
o Understanding the role of the leader  
o Evaluating change impacts,  
o Disseminating change,  
o Resistance to change/Engendering readiness for change 
 Time management 
o The benefits of increased productivity, well-being and efficiency 
o Strategies (prioritizing tasks/actions by applying a range of criteria e.g. very 
important, important, not important; use planning tool to track use of time, provide 
alerts and remind of priorities, schedule time app ropriately and generously, 
develop motivating habits and triggers e.g. Do It Now, delegate where possible) 
 Work-Life balance 
o The risk-intensive, conflict-ridden nature of policing and effect on mental health 
and relationships 
o Stressors (increased stakehold er expectations, time and response pressures, 
technology 
o Responses (reduced commitment and productivity in various work and life roles 
or vice versa, neglect of family/personal interests, responding in negative ways) 
o Strategies (Self -awareness, job satisfaction and fulfillment, positive lifestyle 
choices, boundary-setting, assistance structures and programs) 
 Ethical considerations in policing 
o Engendering an ethical culture against police misbehaviour 
o Ethical challenges (On-duty and off-duty behaviours, profiling, partiality vs 
impartiality, job stress, hygiene factors) 
o Solutions (Use of force policies, compliance, effective communication strategies, 
motivational strategies, ongoing training) 
  



 
15 | P a g e  
 
TTPS EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT        
SYLLABUS                JULY 2022 
Preparation for Examination 
 
As noted under assessment for ms, the examination paper for this subject will consist of a 
judicious mix of objective and subjective type questions ranging from multiple choice, true -
false, short answer, micro /mini-case studies and questions responses in essay format.  This 
section of the syllabus provides information to support excellent responses to the 
requirements of these various types of examination questions. However, tips on prepar ing 
for examinations generally are set out first.  
 
Tips on Writing Examinations 
General Approach 
As the examination approaches it is useful to make adequate preparation by  doing the 
following: 
1. Organize your notes reducing them to key points. 
2. Make master cards/flash cards or index cards for quick revision.  
3. Select what to revise and pr epare a range of answers to possible questions on each 
topic. 
4. Draw up a time table and work out how much time you have to revise, build in 
potential emergencies. 
5. Start your revision early. 
Writing The Examination 
1. Once you are seated in the examination room , and have been provided with your 
examination paper and answer booklet, etc. settle yourself and follow all instructions 
given by the invigilator.  
2. Read the instruction on the examination paper carefully, at least twice.  
3. Fill out any personal details as required, e.g. examination candidate no. 
4. Make a preliminary scan of the whole paper to make sure that all expected sections are 
there and your paper is not faulty. 
5. Write out the time that you should start and finish each section so that you can 
complete the whole paper. Be sure to leave a few minutes to review your work at the 
end.  
6. Complete the compulsory questions as best as possible before moving to the section 
where a choice of questions is presented (Essay-response questions). 
7. When selecting from non -compulsory questions, read each question through at least 
twice. Compare what seems to be expected, in general for each question. Notice how 
many parts there are to the question. Tick the question/s you will attempt and the one 
you can do best tick twice. Draft brief notes/key terms related to the topic of the 
questions that you have selected. You may realize that a question is not what you 
thought, and you may need to select another. 



 
16 | P a g e  
 
TTPS EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT        
SYLLABUS                JULY 2022 
 
Completing The Examination 
Towards the end of the examination, use the last minutes to 
1. check that you have attempted all compulsory questions. 
2.  read your answers and correct any obvious errors. 
3. respond to unfinished questions in note form showing how you would have addressed 
the particular issues if you had had the time. This could gain you some valuable marks. 
 
Tips on Responding to Different Question Formats. 
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQs) 
 
An MCQ consists of a stem and a number of  options. The stem is usually a statement or a 
question but may be numerical data, a graphic or a paragraph that give rise to a number of 
follow-up questions and options. The options are usually four in number and the correct 
option may complete a statement, answer the question or is the end result of a manipulation 
of data.  
The following approach to an MCQ should be taken. 
1. Cover up the options and read the entire question carefully, taking note of key terms. 
2. Formulate an answer to the question before reading the options. Your first thought is 
usually correct, so avoid the temptation to change answers unless you are absolutely 
certain about the correction.  
3. Look for your choice in the list of options but make s ure and read all the options since a 
well-crafted multiple choice presents false options that are close to the correct one.  
4. Pay attention to a possible link between stem and the various options. Sometimes a 
particular option does not appear well-connected to the stem. 
5. If one of the options is ‘All of the above’ it may not always be correct. If you are sure two 
or three of the other options are correct, then ‘All of the above’ is a distinct possibility. 
6. Ignore the assumption that if you are not sure choose the C option. Do not pay attention 
to how many A ’s, B’s, C’s etc., you have already selected, to decide whether to change 
your answer. Always choose your best answer.  
7. If you are not sure about the answer, cross out the options that you know are definitely  
wrong. Mark the question with a ‘?’ and return to it close to the end of the section or the 
examination paper. 
 
 



 
17 | P a g e  
 
TTPS EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT        
SYLLABUS                JULY 2022 
 
True-False Questions 
 
A true-false question takes the form of a statement that you must judge as being factual (T) 
or not (F). The statement often includes terms which suggest that something is absolutely true 
or false or relatively true or false. Occasionally, the candidate may be asked to justify the choice 
of true or false by citing the relevant basis. 
 
The following approach should enable you to decide. 
1. Look out for absolute terms (never, always, only, necessary, must, entirely, no, every, any etc.). 
These statements are rarely true. 
2. Look out for relative terms (often, seldom, sometimes, perhaps, generally, ordinarily, frequently, 
etc.). These statements make more modest claims that are more likely to reflect reality and 
are thus often true. 
3. Be careful with statements containing the word “and”. All parts or phrases of the 
statement have to be true for you to select “True” as your answer. 
4. A statement containing the word “or” only needs one of the phrases to be true for you to 
select “True” as your answer. 
5. Beware of negatives (no, not, etc.) contained in the statement. They can be confusing. Try 
underlining the negative words and reading the sentence excluding them. If this sentence 
is true, then the answer is false and vice versa. 
6. Try and earn additional marks by providing justifications for your choice (only if required).   
 
Essay-Type Questions.  
 
An essay question is a statement and/or query on a topic as well as a directive word called a 
prompt. You are expected to respond by not only demonstrating knowledge of the topic but 
putting the information in the form suggested by the prompt. For example you may be asked 
to “describe” which is different from being asked to “provide arguments in support of or 
against a decision”. In an examination situation, the maximum length of the essay is usually 
specified and you should try to be within 10%, more or less, of the specification. 
 
Pre-writing the essay 
1. Analyse the question. What do you understand that the topic requires you to do? Do you 
have sufficient information given what is required? Recall what you know of the subject 
matter including the appropriate jargon. Understanding the topic before writing about it 
is critical. Read all the questions and choose wisely. 
2. A useful starting point is to break t he question/statement by phrase, or word by word , 
and highlight all the key words or phrases. These indicate the subject matter/s to be dealt 
with in the essay as well as the instruction of the examiner. Some questions are set out as 



 
18 | P a g e  
 
TTPS EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT        
SYLLABUS                JULY 2022 
statements; others, as requests for your opinion or judgement with justifications and/or 
examples. Sometimes you are required to make and state an assumption about the 
context for your answer. 
3. Examine the prompt i.e. instructional (or directive) words in the essay title. These 
words reveal how the subject should be dealt with. The following are some common 
instructional words and their definitions: 
 
SOME 
INSTRUCTIONAL 
WORDS 
MEANING 
Account for Give reasons for; provide evidence to support (Do not  
confuse give an account of, which is asking for a  
description) 
Analyse Break-down into component parts and explain how they 
relate to each other 
Assess Estimate the importance or value of; judge 
Compare Examine similarities and differences – perhaps reach a  
conclusion about which is preferable 
Consider Take into account; weigh up the advantages/ disadvantages 
Contrast   Examine the differences between and provide explanations 
Define    Give the precise meaning of a word or phrase. 
Describe  Give a detailed account; provide the main characteristics. 
Differentiate   Explain the difference; distinguish between,  
Discuss  
   
Investigate and/or examine in detail; sift the arguments and 
debate, give reasons for and against; examine the implications 
Evaluate   
   
    
Appraise the merit or worth of something; judge the impact; 
importance or success of; include your personal opinion and 
evidence to support your evaluation. 
Explain  
     
Provide details about how something happens/eg; give 
reasons for; account for. 
Illustrate   
    
Make clear by the use of concrete examples from a range of 
sources. Use a figure or diagram to explain or clarify. 
Indicate   Show; point out; verify 
Justify   
   
 
Show adequate grounds for decisions or conclusions Answer 
the main objections to them; make a case for a  
particular perspective; provide evidence 
Outline   
   
    
Describe the main features, or general principles, of a subject. 
Omitting minor details and emphasizing structure and 
arrangement 



 
19 | P a g e  
 
TTPS EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT        
SYLLABUS                JULY 2022 
Relate   
  
Show how things are connected to each other, and to what 
extent they are alike or affect each other 
State   Set down the main points, present in a brief clear form 
Suggest/Recommend Set out a possible solution to an issue with its potential 
result/s and a justification for your proposal 
Summarise  
  
Give a concise account of the main points of a matter  
avoiding unnecessary details and examples 
 
Writing the Essay 
 
Once you have an idea of the scope of the essay, you can begin to write. An essay has three 
major parts: introduction, main body and conclusion. 
The Introduction. 
A good introduction sets the context for the essay, making it clear what you think the problem 
or question is, how you are going to approach it and how the essay should develop. It should 
contain some comments on your understanding of the title and the main issues that you are 
going to address and why. In other words, outline the main points you w ill be expanding in 
the main body. The introduction provides the examiner/reader with a preview of the stages 
through which the essay will develop. It usually does not need to be more than a paragraph. 
 
The Main Body. 
The main body of the essay provides th e opportunity for you to present explanations and 
arguments with ideas, opinions, and facts. Key points should be presented in a logical manner 
and the linkages between them made explicit. It is vital that key points are supported by 
relevant examples or evidence.  
Each paragraph should raise a central issue aspect or idea and include evidence to support it. 
Each paragraph should be complete within itself but should be linked with the preceding and 
following paragraphs. Two paragraphs may present different ideas or sides of an argument 
but linked to that difference: for example, paragraph 1 may address the cause of something 
and paragraph 2 may explain the effect. Other approaches may separate the positive and 
negative aspects pf an argument, or describe a before and after situation.  
Continuity across paragraphs should be maintained and to signal to the reader how you are 
moving on by the use of linking words or phrases: such as however, similarly, consequently, as 
a result, on the other hand, etc. The man body should present a balanced view and all aspect of 
the title are given adequate coverage. 
 
The Conclusion. 
A good conclusion signals to the reader that the essay has ended. It should show the 
reader/examiner how the essay answered what was required of you. Ensure that all the ideas 



 
20 | P a g e  
 
TTPS EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT        
SYLLABUS                JULY 2022 
or arguments presented in the main body are summarised and set out in the conclusion. Some 
essays require that you state an opinion, i.e. come to a conclusion . Summarise the main 
arguments which support your view, not the ones that weaken your judgement. Make it clear 
what implications flow from your conclusion. While the introduction  and the conclusion 
should agree with each other and never be contradictory, avoid the temptation to repeat the 
introduction or introduce new information. The conclusion is normally about the same length 
as or shorter than the introduction.  
 
Short Answer Questions (SAQs) 
 
SAQs are similar to essay-type questions as they also consist of a statement and/or query on 
a topic together with a prompt. They are often used in examinations to expand the number of 
topics that can be tested in one section or paper.  A lthough they can be treated like a mini -
essays, the expected response is usually only one or two paragraphs long or might be set out 
as a list of items.  
The following approach to an SAQ should be taken. 
1. Begin by defining all the terms in the question and take note of any boundaries or 
parameters given e.g. if you are asked for two conditions, don’t write out five hoping you 
get it right. Add supporting examples only if requested. 
2. Write the answer in simple concise sentences including only as much informati on as 
possible - this is more important than style. 
3. If you are asked to answer within a specific number of words, make sure that is what you 
do.  
      
Mini/Micro Case Study Questions (MCSQs) 
 
MCSQs briefly describe a sequence of events that result in a real-life problem or demonstrate 
the realistic effects of an issue. The examiner will ask one or more questions based on the one 
or two topics, relevant to the subject area being tested, that app ear in the scenario. Your 
response should be based on your knowledge of laws, regulations, protocols or theories of 
the subject area.  
 
The following approach to an MCSQ should be taken. 
1. Read the questions at the end of the case or section of the case first. 
2. Determine which topic/s, concept/s, principle/s or process/es of the subject area appears 
to be the focus of the case and its questions.  
3. Underline the prompt and key terms in the questions 
4. Read the case carefully and draw lines linking statements or observations in the case with 
the questions. 
5. Answer each question in alignment with the prompt used in the question e.g. don’t just 



 
21 | P a g e  
 
TTPS EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT        
SYLLABUS                JULY 2022 
list recommended actions if you were asked to justify them  
6. Make appropriate recommendations which should be reasonable and state what outcomes 
can be expected if that action is taken 
7. Write only to the depth suggested by the allocation of marks. 



 
22 | P a g e  
 
TTPS EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT        
SYLLABUS                JULY 2022 
Sample Questions 
 
POLICE PROMOTION (MAIN) EXAMINATION TO THE RANK OF ---------------- 
SUBJECT   : POLICE SUPERVISION / MANAGEMENT 
DATE    :  
TIME ALLOWED  :  HOURS 
Instructions: 
 
THIS PAPER HAS THREE SECTIONS   
CANDIDATES MUST ATTEMPT ALL SECTIONS. THE EXAMINATION IS WORTH 100 
MARKS.  
CANDIDATES ARE REQUIRED TO OBTAIN A MINIMUM OF 50% OF THE POSSIBLE 
MARKS.  
  
YOU ARE REMINDED OF THE NEED TO USE PROPER DICTION, CORRECT 
SPELLING, STANDARD GRAMMAR AND AN ORDERLY, LEGIBLE AND NEAT 
PRESENTATION OF YOUR WORK.  
 
 
WRITE YOUR EXAMINATION NUMBER ON THE COVER OF THE EXAMINATION 
ANSWER BOOKLET AND ON THE TOP OF EVERY PAGE THROUGHOUT THE 
BOOKLET. 
 
 
DO NOT WRITE YOUR NAME AND REGIMENTAL NUMBER IN RESPONSE TO ANY 
QUESTION 
  



 
23 | P a g e  
 
TTPS EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT        
SYLLABUS                JULY 2022 
Section 1 Multiple Choice Questions (1 mark each) 
 
Instructions: Complete this Section by copying the question number  into your answer 
booklet and write the letter of your choice from the list of options 
 
1. Which of the following is NOT a traditional description of the role of police in society? 
 
A. law enforcement without discretionary considerations 
B. using force as necessary to maintain order 
C. applying conflict resolution methods situationally 
D. prevention of criminal activity 
 
2. Which of the following views of the role of the police has become the predominant view in 
society at large? 
 
A. social service      
B. law enforcement 
C. crime investigation     
D. use of force 
 
3. Which of the following are reasons for setting objectives? 
 
I. To know what to do if things go wrong   
II. To monitor progress as it takes place 
III. To identify how much profit has been made  
IV. To ensure that everything is going as planned 
A. I and II only 
B. II and IV only 
C. I, II and III only 
D. II, III and IV only 
 
4. Which of the following ought NOT to be a guide to the police service in its role as an 
agency of government? 
 
A. budgetary allocations   
B.  national security priorities 
C. existing laws and regulations    
D. employment opportunities 
 
 
 



 
24 | P a g e  
 
TTPS EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT        
SYLLABUS                JULY 2022 
5. Bureaucracy is considered the most efficient approach to management because 
 
A. It insists on compliance with rules   
B. It prescribes informal relationships  
C. It emphasizes the human elements in an organization  
D. It provides more freedom to act 
 
6.  Which of the following roles does not constitute management roles as proposed by 
Henry Mintzberg? 
 
A. Interpersonal role        
B. informational role  
C. decision-making role        
D. training role 
 
7.  Examine the following guiding principle for management: Division of work is applicable to 
all types of enterprise .  Select the option below which describes the nature of the principle 
accurately 
A. General Guidelines      
B. Universal applicability  
C. Flexible usage      
D. Contingent situations  
   
8.  Assigning different supervisors to the same subordinates at different times and for 
different purposes is an example of how some organisations wo rk. Which principle of 
administrative theory will be violated? 
A. Unity of Command      
B. Span of control  
C. Scalar chain     
D. Esprit de corps 
 
9.  Which of the following models of policing is seen as the backbone upon which all others 
are built 
A. professional   
B. community   
C. intelligence-led   
D. strategic 
 
 



 
25 | P a g e  
 
TTPS EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT        
SYLLABUS                JULY 2022 
10. Which of the following qualities appear to contradict the professional approach to police 
management? 
A. enforcement of policies in human relations   
B. impartiality and accountability  
C. use of common sense and discretion   
D. efficiency and effectiveness goals 
 
11. Which of the following is the process of getting activities completed efficiently and 
effectively with and through other people? 
A. Leading   
B. Management        
C. Supervision   
D. Controlling 
 
12. A worker recently got a raise in his salary due to annual increment. Which of his human 
needs is being satisfied through this?  
A. Security Needs        
B. Belonging Needs 
C. Self Actualisation Needs      
D. Basic Physiological Needs 
 
13. Effective motivation in an organisation does not contribute towards  
A. Developing performance levels of employees   
B. Helping to reduce employee turnover  
C. Resistance to changes     
D. Achieving job satisfaction  
 
14. The decision -making step, which consists of determining organization goals and 
predicting alternatives is called __________ 
A. Organization   
B. Alternation    
C. Planning    
D. Valuing  
15. Complete the following sentence: Given a dynamic crime prevention environment, a core 
leadership quality of flexibility would be most useful for the managerial function of - 
A. organising    
B. planning     



 
26 | P a g e  
 
TTPS EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT        
SYLLABUS                JULY 2022 
C. controlling   
D. communicating 
 
16. Good decision -making follows a clear process. Which of the following is the final step?
 A. Identifying the problem   
B. Evaluating the decision’s effectiveness 
C. Identifying decision criteria  
D. Selecting one alternative from among solutions 
 
17. A set of steps which outline a relatively limited set of activities is called a/an 
A. Operational plan       
B. Strategic plan 
C. Tactical plan      
D. Personal plan 
 
18.  A manager’s strongest asset when making decisions is usually his/her 
A. Political skills     
B. Conceptual skills 
C. Technical skills     
D. Interpersonal skills 
 
19. The function of management which integrates the activities of different units of the 
organization is called  
A. Activating    
B. Controlling   
C. Organising  
D. Planning   
20. The assignment of responsibilities to a subordinate is called: 
A. Coordination  
B. Specialization  
C. Delegation   
D. Authorisation 
21. Formal control in an organisation refers to its -------------------  
A. Salary levels and shared values     
B. Rules and procedures  
C. Trust and respect      
D. Competition   



 
27 | P a g e  
 
TTPS EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT        
SYLLABUS                JULY 2022 
22. A common cause of organisational conflict is 
A. an authoritative style of management   
B. a high rate of turnover 
C. misuse of company time     
D. inequitable allocation of resources 
 
23. Identify the correct sequence of steps involved in the communication process.  
A. Sender, Message, Encoding, Media, Decoding, Receiver, Feedback  
B. Sender, Decoding, Receiver, Feedback, Message, Encoding,  
C. Sender, Message, Encoding, Media, Decoding, Receiver, Feedback  
D. Sender, Media, Decoding, Receiver, Message, Encoding,  
24. Lateral communication takes place from  
A. Corporal to Corporal in different units     
B. Inspector to Sergeant in the same station 
C. From Sergeant to Inspector of different stations  
D. From First division officers to Second Division officers 
 
25. According to the current strategic plan, which of the following is NOT a priority objective 
of the community partnership initiatives 
A. restoring public trust and confidence  
B. addressing community concerns 
C. improving perception of the TTPS 
D.  increasing respect for the TTPS 
 
26. You have bee n invited to attend a community watch group meeting.  Which of the 
following would not be one of your stakeholder relations roles?  
A. Informational   
B. Leader   
C. Liaison   
D. Disseminator 
27. Which of the following circumstances make training senior officers to manage change 
LEAST useful in a policing environment? 
A. There is a significant lack of task stability 
B. Seniors are faced with top-down operational directives 
C. The organisation is usually in a state of disequilibrium 
D. There are few opportunities to use pull strategies of influence 



 
28 | P a g e  
 
TTPS EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT        
SYLLABUS                JULY 2022 
28. Time management when properly considered requires which of the following 
A. productivity 
B. prioritizing 
C. technology 
D. stress 
29. Increased expectations, increased pressure to respond promptly and misuse of technology 
may affect negatively which of the following personal goals of a police officer 
A. career advancement 
B. work-life balance 
C. transformational leadership 
D. ethical policing 
30. Which of the following is not a strong trigger for officer misconduct? 
A. complex law      
B. officer attributes  
C. organizational culture     
D. community factors 
 
Section 2 Mini-Cases (10 -15 marks each) 
 
MINI CASE 1 
Sergeant Wharton who is responsible for an administrative department is very meticulous 
with a strong work ethic. However, she does not arrange for agreed -upon standards of 
performance with junior staff nor does she delegate any planning or decision -making tasks. 
She demands reports of events and activities from subordinates and checks the reports in 
great detail spending an inordinate amount of her work day in this role. She returns work she 
considers incomplete or inaccurate work, with harsh comments. Sub ordinates are expected 
to do over reports with little understanding of departmental priorities or report deficiencies. 
As a result, reports to the Divisional Head are often late and subordinates report their 
unhappiness and put in requests for transfer. As  her supervisor, you have discussed her 
leadership style and managerial behaviours with her. She replied that she believed that 
officers just have no pride in their work and were generally unambitious and irresponsible. 
As you are determined to change her behaviour you recommended her lateral transfer to a 



 
29 | P a g e  
 
TTPS EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT        
SYLLABUS                JULY 2022 
post in the recruit mentorship unit at the Police Academy for a six -month period. She was 
accepted and you have set up a meeting to discuss your expectations of her in this new role.  
 
QUESTIONS 
 
1. (a) Name the management theory which might explain why Sergeant Wharton refuses to 
delegate. (1m) 
    (b) Provide a reason for your answer. (1m) 
2. Name two responsibilities of a supervisor that are not being demonstrated by Sergeant 
Wharton. (2m) 
 
3. (a) List any two management functions/tasks whose absence or poor application   might 
be contributing to the issues outlined in this case. (2m) 
(b) Discuss how a different approach to any one function listed at (a) might lead to an 
improvement to the situation outlined in this case. (2m) 
4. (a) Outline two major areas in the study of management  that Sergeant Wharton should 
undertake to prepare her for the role of ‘recruit mentor’. (3m) 
     (b) Provide a justification for your recommendations. (4m) 



 
30 | P a g e  
 
TTPS EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT        
SYLLABUS                JULY 2022 
MINI CASE 2 
The newly-promoted Inspector Thomas has been put in charge of two sub -stations, Layton 
and Peyton and is determined to be the leader who changes the way officers interact to a more 
collegial and communal approach to the tasks of policing. He has decided to use the common 
command and control -type instructions used in professional policing for an unexpected 
benefit.  
One such command, from the Superintendent, was the preparation and submission of 
quantitative and qualitative monthly reports on operational and administrative matters. This 
task was seen as unnecessary by several unit heads who sometimes submitted deficient 
reports. Thomas saw an opportunity to develop a team spirit among his reporting officers of 
Layton and Peyton. With the permission of the Sup erintendent, he instructed all unit heads 
to transmit, electronically, a copy of the reports to their counterparts in Layton and Peyton 
every month. He also organised for a follow -up meeting of all unit heads at the end of three 
months. In his reminder, tw o days before the meeting, attendees were told that they would 
be expected to state their observations and offer recommendations for improvement. The first 
meeting began promptly with a general invitation to speak.  Sergeant Phillip of Layton Station 
who plans to write the up-coming examination for promotion to Inspector was very vocal at 
that meeting and commented critically on the reports of Peyton’s units.  The meeting became 
very noisy and had to be suspended rather abruptly. 
 
QUESTIONS 
1. (a) Name the leadership style demonstrated by Inspector Thomas. (1m) 
(b) Provide a reason for your answer. (1m) 
2. Using a diagram, illustrate the levels of authority and communication flow that 
appears to exist in this scenario. (4m) 
3. What is one benefit and one challenge to the effort of Inspector Thomas to engender a 
team spirit? (4m) 
4. Suggest an action which should have been taken by Inspector Thomas to prevent the 



 
31 | P a g e  
 
TTPS EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT        
SYLLABUS                JULY 2022 
conflict that led to the suspension of the meeting? (3m) 
5. What is a possible concern if Sergeant Phillip is successful and is put in charge of both 
Station’s unit heads? (2m) 
 
Section 3 Essay-Type Questions (20-40 marks) 
Write an essay in no fewer than 250 words on one of the following. 
1. Using examples, compare any two leadership styles. (40m) 
2. Discuss TWO advantages  of knowing your station’s community characteristics and 
TWO ways that you might go about developing positive relations. (20m) 
3. Provide arguments and examples of the benefit of proper planning in the management 
of the resources under your supervision. (20m) 
 
 
 
 
 
  



 
32 | P a g e  
 
TTPS EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT        
SYLLABUS                JULY 2022 
Model Answers with Mark Scheme 
Section 1 Multiple Choice Questions 
 
1. C                                                                         2. A 
3. B                                                                          4. D 
5. A                                                                         6. D 
7. B                                                                          8. A 
9. A                                                                         10. C 
11. A                                                                       12. D 
13. C                                                                       14. C 
15. B                                                                        16. B 
17. A                                                                        18. B 
19. C                                                                        20. D 
21. B                                                                        22. D 
23. C                                                                        24. A 
25. D                                                                        26. B 
27. C                                                                        28. B 
29. B                                                                        30. A 
 
 
 
 
 



 
33 | P a g e  
 
TTPS EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT        
SYLLABUS                JULY 2022 
 
Section 2: Mini-cases 
 
Mini-case 1  
 
DELEGATION, LEADERSHIP AND HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 
 
1. (a) Name the management theory which might explain why Sergeant Wharton refuses to 
delegate. (1m) 
Approach Recall management theories about philosophies that influence 
managers’ behaviours 
Content McGregor’s Theory X (1m) 
 
     (b) Provide a reason for your answer. (1m) 
Approach Review case for supporting words/statement 
Content Statement in case: Her belief that “officers have no pride in their work 
were unambitious and irresponsible” (1m) 
      
2. Name two responsibilities of a supervisor that are not being demonstrated by Sergeant 
Wharton. (2m) 
Approach Recall human resource management knowledge, skills and tasks 
Content Any two of the following: Managing the work -flow efficiently, 
managing, motivating, or developing subordinates, recognizing and 
managing conflict, creating a safe and conducive work environment. 
 
3. (a) List any two management functions/tasks whose absence or poor application might be 
contributing to the issues outlined in this case (2m) 
Approach Recall list of management functions (PLOCCD) 



 
34 | P a g e  
 
TTPS EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT        
SYLLABUS                JULY 2022 
Content Any two of the following with relevance to case: planning, leading, 
controlling, communicating, delegating 
 
(b) Discuss how a different approach to any one function listed at (a)  might lead to an 
improvement to the situation outlined in this case. (2m) 
Approach Suggest at least one change to one of the following (1m) and show how 
the situation might be improved (1m). 
Content Sergeant Wharton’s: autocratic leadership style, not sharing knowledge 
of departmental priorities, non -use of performance standards, poor 
communication style, lack of delegation, poor motivational practices, 
Theory X as her management / leadership philosophy. 
 
4. (a) Outline two major areas in the study of management that Sergeant Wharton should 
undertake to prepare her for the role of ‘recruit mentor’ (3m) 
Approach Identify one/two tasks/roles of a mentor/coach for newly hired persons 
(1m).  
List any two relevant general or specific areas (1m). 
Describe either one briefly (1m) 
Content Human resource management knowledge  
Leadership competencies -   
Managerial roles and tasks (1m each) 
    
  (b) Provide a justification for each recommendation. (4m) 
Approach Address each recommendation and link with task individually 
Content Human resource management knowledge – e.g. career planning, time 
management, work-life balance 
Leadership competencies - communication skills 



 
35 | P a g e  
 
TTPS EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT        
SYLLABUS                JULY 2022 
Managerial roles - informational role, liaison role, conflict and change 
management. (2m each) 
 
 
Mini-case 2:  
 
LEADERSHIP, COMMUNICATION, PLANNING AND MOTIVATION 
 
1. (a) Name the leadership style demonstrated by Inspector Thomas. (1m) 
Approach Recall types of leadership 
Content Transformational leadership (1m) 
 
     (b) Provide a reason for your answer. (1m) 
Approach Review case for supporting words/statement 
Content Statement in case: the leader who changes the way members interact 
with one another. (1m) 
 
2. Using a diagram, illustrate the levels of authority and communication flow that appears 
to exist in this scenario. (4m) 
Approach Recall topic - Communication flows 
Content - Identify the authority figures mentioned Superintendent, Inspector, Unit 
Heads (1m for any 2) 
- Identify the direction of the flows of information. Use single-headed or 
double-headed arrows between levels to show downward, upward and 
lateral communication flows (1m for any 2 arrows correct) 
     
3. What is one benefit and one challenge to the effort of Inspector Thomas to engender a 
team spirit? (4m) 



 
36 | P a g e  
 
TTPS EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT        
SYLLABUS                JULY 2022 
Approach Recall the benefits and limitations of team spirit as a principle of 
administrative theory of management 
Content Benefits (1m each): increased efficiency and effectiveness from team, 
collaboration brings strengths and reduces effects of weaknesses, 
members willing to learn from one another increases each member’s 
qualities 
Challenges: Persons not willing to fit in, persons fee ling undervalued, 
not heard, persons using others/opportunities to advance career, 
increased timelines for decision -making/action, reduced innovation, 
blame games 
 
4.  Suggest an action which should have been taken by Inspector Thomas to pr event the 
conflict that led to the suspension of the meeting? (3m) 
Approach Recall: the importance of communication and principles of change 
management.  
Content 1.     Prepare for resistance to change by recognizing and engendering 
readiness  
2.     Ensure that minimum standards for reports exist to support the 
less capable team members 
3.     Share purpose and aims for action with team to get buy-in 
4.     Consider the psycho-social characteristics of team members that 
may prevent trust and commitment to collaboration 
5.     Employ a team-building exercise at beginning of meeting to 
encourage positive atmosphere and reduce tensions 
 
5. What might become an issue if Sergeant Phillip is successful and is put in charge of both 
Stations’ unit heads? (2m) 



 
37 | P a g e  
 
TTPS EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT        
SYLLABUS                JULY 2022 
Approach Recall: topics - principles of conflict management, leadership 
philosophies, styles, skills, management competencies, ethical policing 
Content Inspector Phillip becoming a source of conflict, an inappropriate 
leadership style, poor communication skills, inability to balance 
professionalism with communalism, demonstrating partiality  
 
Section 3 Essay-Type Questions 
 
1. Using examples, compare any two leadership styles. (40m) 
Approach Topic: Leadership styles  
Content  Introduction (1m) 
 Choose any two from the list below; describe two main features of 
each style (6m each) 
 
o Autocratic/directive,  
o Transactional/exchange,  
o Situational/discretionary/contingency, 
Transformational/charismatic/trait,  
o Servant 
 
 Examine 2 similarities with example (8m) and 2 differences with 
example (8m)  
 
 Conclusion about which is preferable – (1m) 
 Use of English language– (5m) 
 
2. (a)  Define the term community policing. (2m) 
(b) Discuss TWO advantages to policing of knowing your station’s community 
characteristics. (6m) 
(c)  Using examples, outline THREE ways that you might go about developing positive 
relations with community stakeholders. (12m) 



 
38 | P a g e  
 
TTPS EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT        
SYLLABUS                JULY 2022 
Approach Community policing; stakeholder management 
Content  Definition should include organizational strategy involved e.g. 
allocation of resources and purpose/goal/expected outcome e.g. 
addressing community particular issues (2m) 
 Any 2 advantages (3m each): definition and benefits of crime 
prevention, definition and benefits of cri me-solving, reduction of 
disorder, increased sense of security etc. 
 Any 2 stakeholder relations development strategies (3m each) e.g. 
participate in events with influential government agencies and 
community groups, be more present in community e.g. foot pa trols, 
develop responsive communication strategy etc. 
 Use of English language – (2m) 
 
3. Provide arguments and examples of the benefit of proper planning in the management of 
the resources under your supervision (20m) 
Approach Topic: Planning as a function of management 
Content  Define term: planning (2m) 
 Identify 2 major groups of resources (human, infrastructure and/or 
equipment (2m each) with examples (2m each) 
 Arguments for proper planning for resource management up to 3 -4 
benefits/advantages with relevant example from resource group (12m) 
- Sets goals/objectives or expected outcomes 
- provides guidelines/framework for decisions and actions e.g. 
budget 
- facilitates team contribution and motivates team spirit 
- increases personal and team productivity 



 
39 | P a g e  
 
TTPS EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT        
SYLLABUS                JULY 2022 
- optimizes allocation/deployment of resources 
- encourages responsibility and accountability 
- other 
 Use of English Language – (2m) 
 