 
1 | P a g e  
 
T.T.P.S. EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE DUTIES I SYLLABUS        JULY 2022 
 
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO POLICE SERVICE 
 
SECOND DIVISION  
 
EXAMINATION SYLLABUS  
 
  
FOR THE RANKS OF  
 
 
 INSPECTORS 
 SERGEANTS 
 CORPORALS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
July 2022 
 
Police Service Examination Board 
 
  



 
2 | P a g e  
 
T.T.P.S. EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE DUTIES I SYLLABUS        JULY 2022 
Contents 
Background .................................................................................................................................. 3 
Syllabus underpinnings ............................................................................................................ 3 
Skills and Abilities ................................................................................................................. 5 
Assessment forms .................................................................................................................... 6 
Scheme of the Examination ................................................................................................... 6 
Content Standards ...................................................................................................................... 7 
Preparation For Examination .................................................................................................. 10 
Tips on Writing Examinations ............................................................................................ 10 
Tips on Responding to Different Question Formats...................................................... 11 
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQs) ................................................................................. 11 
True-False Questions .......................................................................................................... 12 
Essay-Type Questions. ....................................................................................................... 12 
Short Answer Questions (SAQs) ...................................................................................... 15 
Mini/Micro Case Study Questions (MCSQs) ................................................................. 16 
Sample Questions ..................................................................................................................... 17 
Instructions: ............................................................................................................................ 17 
Section 1A Multiple Choice Questions ................................................................................ 18 
Section 1B True/False Questions ......................................................................................... 22 
Section 1C Short Answer Questions (5 marks each) ......................................................... 23 
Section 2 Mini-cases ............................................................................................................... 24 
Section 3 Essay-Type Questions ........................................................................................... 27 
Provision of source material for answers ............................................................................. 29 
Section 1A Multiple Choice Questions ................................................................................ 29 
Section 1B True/False Questions ......................................................................................... 29 
Section 1C Short Answer Questions .................................................................................... 30 
Section 2 Mini-Cases .............................................................................................................. 32 
Section 3 Essay-Type Questions ........................................................................................... 33 
 



 
3 | P a g e  
 
T.T.P.S. EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE DUTIES I SYLLABUS        JULY 2022 
Background 
In accordance with the strategic direction of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service, the 
Commissioner of Police has mandated the Police Service Examination Board (PSEB) to 
reform the current examination regime which is in use in the Second Division of the TTPS. 
The following changes have been adopted: 
 
i. a revision of curriculum  with the purpose of developing a  modern, candidate 
friendly syllabi. 
ii. the incorporation of examination components that reflect the demands of the 
current job descriptions of the ranks  from Corporal to Inspector in the Second 
Division as well as the new and pressing demands on the modern Police Service. 
iii. the administration of examinations in formats which allow comprehensive 
assessment of required knowledge, skills, and abilities. 
 
In alignment with this mandate, a revised version of the subject area Police Duties I is 
presented in this syllabus. It provides a comprehensive, high quality and relevant set of 
content standards by listing the official source of the content  and summarizing the key 
points therein . The objective of the Police Duties I Syllabus (PDS) is to formalize and 
provide boundaries to the process by which candidates will demonstrate the knowledge, 
skills and abilities needed to operate at each of the promotional levels in the Second 
Division of the TTPS. The underlying assumption is that familiarity with the topics of this 
Syllabus will enable the successful officer to perform in all the functional areas of the rank 
for which they are being assessed . A highly skilled, talented and knowledgeable Police 
Officer will be prepared to meet the challenges and opportunities of the rapidly changing 
demands of policing in the 21st century.  
 
This syllabus is the product of collaboration between a curriculum devel oper and an 
experienced member of the police service.  It is designed to promote a more student-
centered approach to instruction and to support self-study in preparation for assessment. 
 
Syllabus underpinnings  
 
The organization and content of the PDS is shaped by the nature and structure of the 
subject matter to be learnt.  There is an attempt to recognize the dynamic and evolving 
nature of the policing environment. This means that the subject matter covered is reality-
based, current and sufficient for its purpose . The PDS must respond to changes in the 
strategic direction of the organisation, cohere with new social and cultural imperatives, 
and keep up with legislative and administrative protocols as they arise. As such, this PDS 
is deemed to be current for the period 2022-2025 and will be subject to review.  
 



 
4 | P a g e  
 
T.T.P.S. EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE DUTIES I SYLLABUS        JULY 2022 
However, there are t hree major curriculum underpinnings that are expected to remain 
constant. These are the constructivist approach to learning, the identification of essential 
outcomes from le arning and the importance of English Language skills in learning the 
subject of Police Duties I.  
 
These principles are discussed briefly below. 
The constructivist 
approach to learning 
In constructivism, the learner uses prior academic knowledge 
as well as personal experience to learn well. The Police Officer 
should therefore approach learning by actively and mindfully 
engaging with the material; putting the information into a 
context, creating and interrogating possible scenarios and 
seeing that knowledge of key terms, strategies, principles, 
rules, and protocols included in this syllabus can inform 
solutions to real-life problems in policing.  Finally, the 
constructivist believes that motivation is a key component in 
learning and therefore the increasing re sponsibility of the role 
of the Corporal, Sergeant or Inspector should be enough of an 
impetus for a sincere effort at covering the PDS. 
 
The essential learning 
outcomes  
Excellent p roblem-solving and communication skills are 
deemed essential outcomes of engaging with the PDS. Police 
Officers are called , individually and collaboratively,  to 
distinguish facts from opinions, ask questions, observe, make 
inferences, and draw conclusions . Skills in oral and written 
communication modes are necessary  for the P olice Officer to 
demonstrate understanding of facts and relationships, present 
information and instructions with clarity and conciseness  and 
demonstrate sensitivity and empathy in behaviour and speech 
where necessary.  
 
The importance of 
English Language in 
learning and 
assessment 
The language skills of reading and writing are very important 
in completing this syllabus and being ready for assessment. 
Reading requires the ability to interpret the vocabulary used, 
extract relevant information (analysis), reconstruct the message 
and respond with reasonable judgement. You should be able to 
read both long and short pieces of text intensively; looking for 
key words and phrases and making links with other pieces of 
information which you read before.  Writing demonstrates 
your ability to think logically, organize your thoughts, and use 
appropriate words, terms or jargon.  Good writing allows 
assessors to understand your approach and stay interested in 
your arguments 
 



 
5 | P a g e  
 
T.T.P.S. EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE DUTIES I SYLLABUS        JULY 2022 
Assessment criteria 
Skills and Abilities 
Determining whether a candidate has gained the required knowledge, skills and abilities 
needed at a given level in the policing system will be the purpose of the summative 
examination. It would be useful if the learner undertakes self -assessments to know how 
much has been learnt along the way. The skills and abilities that candidates are expected 
to de monstrate on completion of this syllabus have been grouped under three (3) 
headings.  
The relevant criteria by which attainment will be judged are set out below: - 
Skills and abilities Criteria - The examination will test candidates’ skills and 
ability to 
Knowledge and 
Comprehension 
1. list elements of diverse acts, laws and statutes relating 
to policing; 
2. identify relevant facts and concepts as they relate to 
policing scenarios; 
3. identify real -life situations or challenges for which 
policing solutions are appropriate and practical  
 
Application and Analysis 1. apply concepts to various scenarios in the policing  
environment; 
2. separate facts and concepts into component parts; 
3. analyse the impact of policing in relation to real life  
situations 
 
Evaluation and Problem  
Solving 
1. select and use facts, legislation, and concepts 
appropriately in problem solving and decision  
making; 
2. provide advice and make judgements based on the 
appropriate laws, acts, statutes,  and body of  
information; 
3. evaluate situations and provide suitable solutions or 
advice concerning problems in policing; 
4. justify and apply appropriate techniques of problem -
solving and decision-making. 
 
  



 
6 | P a g e  
 
T.T.P.S. EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE DUTIES I SYLLABUS        JULY 2022 
Assessment forms 
The PDS is written to be used by all candidates for the three ranks in the Second Division, 
however, the complexity of assessment strategies will increase  according to the rank 
being assessed. The summative examination for each rank will contain a judicious mix of 
objective and subjective type questions ranging from multiple choice, true/false, short 
answer, and essay to micro/mini-case studies. 
Scheme of the Examination 
Each PDS Examination will consist of three Sections. Section 1 will consist of multiple 
choice, true/false or short answer questions based on any topic in the entire syllabus. 
Section 2 will consist of case studies which focus on no more than 2 subject areas. A case 
study may be either micro (150-200-word passage) or mini (400-500-word passage).  Each 
passage will be followed by 3-5 questions. Section 3 will consist of essay questions out of 
which candidates will be expected to write between 1-2 responses. Each essay should be 
no fewer than 250 words. In addition to content, essays will be assessed for correct use of 
the English L anguage, in particular, verb agreement, punctuation, spelling and 
vocabulary use.  
Candidates must obtain 50 percent in order to be deemed successful in the examination. 
The table below sets out the mix of question types to be administered according to 
promotional rank in the Second Division. 
Rank Section 1 Section 2 Section 3 Time 
allocation 
Corporal 30 multiple -
choice and/or 
true/false 
questions 
(1 mark each) 
Two case studies  
(15 marks each) 
One essay from 
choice of three topics  
(40 marks) 
2½ hours  
Sergeant 20 multiple -
choice and/or  
true/false or 
short answer 
questions  
(Total - 30 marks) 
Two case studies  
(15 marks each) 
Two essays from 
choice of four topics  
(20 marks each) 
3 hours  
Inspector 10 true/false 
questions (1 mark 
each) 
5 short answer 
questions  
(4 marks each) 
Three case studies  
(10 marks each) 
Two essays from 
choice of four topics  
(20 marks each) 
3 hours  



 
7 | P a g e  
 
T.T.P.S. EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE DUTIES I SYLLABUS        JULY 2022 
Content Standards 
 
The questions in the examinations will test candidates’ knowledge and understanding of 
six (6) major areas. The areas, sub-areas and the relevant sources of information are listed 
below. 
1. TTPS Strategic Plan 
2. Standing / Departmental Orders 
3. General Policing Duties  
4. Traffic and Road Safety  
5. Fires  
6. Community Policing  
 Subject Area Sub Areas Authority / Section  
1 TTPS Strategic Plan 
 
Police Service 
Transformation 
Programme  
Trinidad and Tobago Police Service Strategic 
Plan  
Policing for the People 
 
Existing Plan 
 
D.O. 117/2005 
D.O. 8/2006 
2 Standing/Departmental 
Orders 
Procedure for Dealing with Classification, 
Investigation and Statistical recording of 
Crime (Incl. crime scene procedures) 
S.O.28 
D.O. 207/2004 
D.O. 254/2006 
  Pocket Diary S.O.16 
  Station Diary S.O.17 
  Licensed Premises Sections S.O.22 
  Care and Maintenance of Police Vehicles S.O.49 
  Books, Registers, Publications and Records S.O.52 
  Police Actions at Protest/Demonstration S.O.54 
  Firearms and Ammunition  S.O. 40 
  Police Firearms and Ammunition  S.O. 41 
  Missing Person  S.O. 51, D.O. 52/2006 
  Mentally Ill Persons S.O 33 
  Custody and Care of Property S.O. 26 
  Charge Room/Reception Area  S.O. 38  D.O. 179/2009 
S.O.9 Secs 1-3; 7-9 
  Appearance and Turnout D.O. 134/2014 S.O 6 Sec 5 
(1 &2) Regs 143(1-5) 
  Marshal of the High Courts, Bailiffs and JP S.O. 46, D.O. 56/2020 
  Beat and patrol S.O.11 
  Identification Parades S.O. 29 
  Statements S.O. 32 
3 General Policing  Care and Custody of Prisoners  



 
8 | P a g e  
 
T.T.P.S. EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE DUTIES I SYLLABUS        JULY 2022 
  Summary Courts Act Ch. 4:20 Sec 109 
  Police Service Regulation 2007 Sec 99 - 138 
  Judge’s Rules /Children’s Judge ’s 
Rules(guidelines) 
 
  Arrest and General Police Duties  
  Police Service Act No. 7 2006 Sec, 45, 46 
  Criminal Law Act Ch. 10:04 Sec 3 
  Summary Courts Act 4:20  Secs104,127 
  Bail Act 4:60 as amended  
  Interpretation: bail in criminal proceeding Sec 3 
  Eligibility for bail Sec 5 
  Circumstances in which bail may be 
denied 
6 
  Restriction on conditions of bail 7 
  Bail with surety  16   
  Forfeiture of security or recognizance 17  
  Exceptions to persons entitled to bail First Schedule as amended 
  Dangerous Drugs  Act 4:60  
  Possession of and trafficking in dangerous 
drugs and Fixed Penalty System 
Sec 4, 5 
  Offences  Sec 6 
  Burden of Proof and Presumption  Sec 29 
  Public Meetings/Marches/Riot  
  Interpretation: Meeting, Public Meeting, 
Public March, Public Place 
Summary Offences Act 
11:02 
Sec 107 
  Holding of public meeting Sec 109 
  Prohibition on public marches and 
demonstration at public meeting  
Sec 110 
  Holders of public meetings may be required 
to call upon meeting to disperse 
Sec 111 
  Permit required for public march  Sec 112 
  Application for permits for marches  
  Prohibition on holding of public meetings 
during public marches 
Sec 115 
  Leaders of march may be required to call on 
march to disperse 
Sec 116  
  Offences  Sec 121 - 125 
  Offences and Arrest without warrant at Riot Riot Act Ch. 1105 sec 
3,4,5,6,7,16 
  Duties of Police Officer at Protest/  
Demonstration 
S.O. 54: Sec 5, 7 



 
9 | P a g e  
 
T.T.P.S. EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE DUTIES I SYLLABUS        JULY 2022 
  Domestic Violence  DV Act Ch. 45:56 
  Duties of a Second Division Officer  S.O. 53 Sec 4,7,8 
  Powers of Police to enter premises without 
warrant 
S.O. 53 Sec 13 
  Duties of Police  Officers who enter 
premises 
S.O. 53 Sec 14 
  General Progress Report  S.O. 53 Sec 15 
  Police may apply for Protection Order Ch. 45:56 Sec 4 
  Duties of a Police Officer Ch. 45:56 Sec 21, 23A 
  Police powers of entry and arrest without 
warrant 
Ch. 45:56 Sec 23 
  Powers of arrest where a Protection Order 
is in Force  
Ch. 45:56 Sec 24 
4 Traffic and Road Safety  Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Act 48:50 (Powers of arrest) 
  Powers of arrest under the MV and RT Act  S.O. 44 Sec 26 
  Duties of a Police Officer receiving a report 
of RTA  
S.O. 44 Sec 36 
  Investigation  S.O. 44 Sec 54 
  Driver of Police vehicle involved in RTA  S.O. 44 Sec 42 
5 Fires Role and responsibilities of the Police officer 
at the scene of a fire 
S.O. 34 Secs 2-7 
6 Community Policing Its Philosophy 
Aims and Objectives 
Community policing at work 
 
D.O. 211/1996 
 
  Community Policing Embracing and 
Practicing the Concept  
D.O. 145/2002 
 
N.B. Some questions will test officers on the most up -to-date laws and strategic plans.  
Applicants are required to obtain and read all amendments to the various laws quoted. 
 
 



 
10 | P a g e  
 
T.T.P.S. EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE DUTIES I SYLLABUS        JULY 2022 
Preparation for Examination 
As noted under assessment forms, the examination paper for this subject will consist of a 
judicious mix of objective and subjective type questions ranging from multiple choice, 
true-false, short answer, micro /mini-case studies and questions responses in essay 
format. This section of the syllabus provides information to support excellent responses 
to the requirements of these  various types of examination questions. However, tips on 
preparing for examinations generally are set out first.  
Tips on Writing Examinations 
General Approach 
As the examination approaches it is useful to make adequate preparation by  doing the 
following: 
1. Organize your notes reducing them to key points. 
2. Make master cards/flash cards or index cards for quick revision.  
3. Select what to revise and prepare a range of answers to possible questions on each 
topic. 
4. Draw up a time table and work out how much time yo u have to revise, build in 
potential emergencies. 
5. Start your revision early. 
Writing the Examination 
1. Once you are seated in the examination room, and have been provided with your 
examination paper and answer booklet, etc. settle yourself and follow all 
instructions given by the Invigilator.  
2. Read the instruction on the examination paper carefully, at least twice.  
3. Fill out any personal details as required, e.g. examination candidate no. 
4. Make a preliminary scan of the whole paper to make sure that all expected sections 
are there and your paper is not faulty. 
5. Write out the time that you should start and finish each section so that you can 
complete the whole paper. Be sure to leave a few minutes to review your work at 
the end.  
6. Read each question through at least twice. Compare what seems to be expected, in 
general for each question. Notice how many parts there are to the question.  Tick 
the question/s you will attempt and the one you can do best tick twice. Draft brief 
notes/key terms related to the topic of the questions that you have selected. You 
may realize that a question is not what you thought, and you may need to select 
another. 
 
  



 
11 | P a g e  
 
T.T.P.S. EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE DUTIES I SYLLABUS        JULY 2022 
Completing The Examination 
Towards the end of the examination, use the last minutes to: - 
1. check that you have attempted all compulsory questions.  
2. read your answers and correct any obvious errors. 
3. respond to unfinished questions in note form showing how you would have 
addressed the particular issues if you had the time. This could gain you some 
valuable marks. 
 
Tips on Responding to Different Question Formats. 
 
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQs) 
 
An MCQ consists of a stem and a number of options. The stem is usually a statement or 
a question but may be numerical data, a graphic or a paragraph that give rise to a number 
of follow -up questions and options. The options are usually four in number and t he 
correct option may complete a statement, answer the question or is the end result of a 
manipulation of data.  
The following approach to an MCQ should be taken: - 
1. Cover up the options and read the entire question carefully, taking note of key 
terms. 
2. Formulate an answer to the question before reading the options. Your first thought 
is usually correct, so avoid the temptation to change answers unless you are 
absolutely certain about the correction.  
3. Look for your choice in the list of options but make sure and read all the options 
since a well-crafted multiple choice presents false options that are close to the correct 
one.  
4. Pay attention to a possible link between stem and the various options. Sometimes a 
particular option does not appear well-connected to the stem. 
5. If one of the options is ‘All of the above’ it may not always be correct. If you are sure 
two or three of the other options are correct, then ‘All of the above’ is a distinct 
possibility. 
6. Ignore the assumption that if you are not sure choose the C option. Do not pay 
attention to how many A ’s, B ’s, C’s etc., you have already selected, to decide 
whether to change your answer. Always choose your best answer.  



 
12 | P a g e  
 
T.T.P.S. EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE DUTIES I SYLLABUS        JULY 2022 
7. If you are not sure about the answer, cross out the options that you know are 
definitely wrong.  Mark the question with a ‘?’ and return to it close to the end of 
the section or the examination paper. 
 
True-False Questions 
 
A true-false question takes the form of a statement that you must judge as being factual 
(T) or not (F). The statement often includes terms which suggest that something is 
absolutely true or false or relatively true or false. Occasionally, the candidate may be asked 
to justify the choice of true or false by citing the relevant basis. 
The following approach should enable you to decide. 
1. Look out for absolute terms (never, always, only, necessary, must, entirely, no, every, 
any etc.). These statements are rarely true. 
2. Look out for relative t erms (often, seldom, sometimes, perhaps, generally, ordinarily, 
frequently, etc.). These statements make more modest claims that are more likely to 
reflect reality and are thus often true. 
3. Be careful with statements containing the word “and”.  All parts or phrases of the 
statement have to be true for you to select “True” as your answer. 
4. A statement containing the word “or” only needs one of the phrases to be true for 
you to select “True” as your answer. 
5. Beware of negatives (no, not, etc.)  contained in the statement. They can be 
confusing. Try underlining the negative words and reading the sentence excluding 
them. If this sentence is true, then the answer is false and vice versa. 
6. Try and earn additional marks by providing justifications for your choice (only if 
required).   
 
Essay-Type Questions.  
 
An essay question is a statement and/or query on a topic as well as a directive word 
called a prompt. You are expected to respond by no t only demonstrating knowledge of 
the topic but putting the information in the form suggested by the prompt. For example, 
you may be asked to “describe” which is different from being asked to “provide 
arguments in support of or against a decision”. In an e xamination situation, the 
maximum length of the essay is usually specified and you should try to be within 10%, 
more or less, of the specification. 
 
 



 
13 | P a g e  
 
T.T.P.S. EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE DUTIES I SYLLABUS        JULY 2022 
Pre-writing the essay 
1. Analyse the question. What do you understand that the topic requires you to do, do 
you have sufficient information given what is required? Recall what you know of 
the subject matter including the appropriate jargon. Understanding the topic before 
writing about it is critical. Read all the questions and choose wisely. 
 
2. A useful starting point is to break the question/statement by phrase , or word by 
word and highlight all the key words or phrases. These indicate the subject matter/s 
to be dealt with in the essay as well as the instruction of the examiner. Some 
questions are set out as stat ements; others, as requests for your opinion or 
judgement with justifications and/or examples. Sometimes you are required to 
make and state an assumption about the context for your answer. 
 
3. Examine the prompt i.e. instructional (or directive) words in the essay title. These 
words reveal how the subject should be dealt with. The following are some common 
instructional words and their definitions: 
INSTRUCTIONAL 
WORD 
MEANING 
Account for Give reasons for; provide evidence to support (Do not  
confuse give an account of, which is asking for a  
description) 
Analyse Break-down into component parts and explain how they relate 
to each other 
Assess Estimate the importance or value of; judge 
Compare Examine similarities and differences – perhaps reach a  
conclusion about which is preferable 
Consider Take into account; weigh up the advantages/ disadvantages 
Contrast   Examine the differences between and provide explanations 
Define    Give the precise meaning of a word or phrase. 
Describe  Give a detailed account; provide the main characteristics. 
Differentiate   Explain the difference; distinguish between,  
Discuss  
   
Investigate and/or examine in detail; sift the arguments and 
debate, give reasons for and against; examine the implications 
Evaluate   
   
    
Appraise the merit or worth of something; judge the impact; 
importance or success of; include your personal opinion and 
evidence to support your evaluation. 
Explain  
     
Provide details about how something happens/ed; give 
reasons for; account for. 



 
14 | P a g e  
 
T.T.P.S. EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE DUTIES I SYLLABUS        JULY 2022 
 
Writing the Essay 
Once you have an idea of the scope of the essay, you can begin to write. An essay has 
three major parts: introduction, main body and conclusion. 
The Introduction. 
A good introduction sets the context for the essay, making it clear what you think the 
problem or question is, how you are going to approach it and how the essay should 
develop. It should contain some comments on your understanding of the title and the 
main issues that you are going to address and why. In other words, outline the main 
points you will be expanding in the main body. The introduction provides the 
examiner/reader with a preview of the stages through which the essay will develop. It 
usually does not need to be more than a paragraph. 
The Main Body. 
The main body of the essay provides the opportunity for you to present explanations and 
arguments with ideas, opinions, and facts. Key points should be presented in a logical 
manner and the linkages bet ween them made explicit. It is vital that key points are 
supported by relevant examples or evidence.  
Each paragraph should raise a central issue aspect or idea and include evidence to 
support it. Each paragraph should be complete within itself but should be linked with 
Illustrate   
    
Make clear by the use of concrete examples from a range of 
sources. Use a figure or diagram to explain or clarify. 
Indicate   Show; point out; verify 
Justify   
  
 
Show adequate grounds for decisions or conclusions.  Answer 
the main objections to them; make a case for a  
particular perspective; provide evidence 
Outline   
   
    
Describe the main features, or general principles, of a subject. 
Omitting minor details and emphasising structure and 
arrangement 
Relate   
  
Show how things are connected to each other, and to what 
extent they are alike or affect each other 
State   Set down the main points, present in a brief clear form 
Suggest/Recommend Set out a possible solution to an issue with its potential result/s 
and a justification for your proposal 
Summarise  
  
Give a concise account of the main points of a matter  
avoiding unnecessary details and examples 



 
15 | P a g e  
 
T.T.P.S. EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE DUTIES I SYLLABUS        JULY 2022 
the preceding and following paragraphs. Two paragraphs may present different ideas or 
sides of an argument but linked to that difference: for example, paragraph 1 may address 
the cause of something and paragraph 2 may explain the effect. Oth er approaches may 
separate the positive and negative aspects of an argument, or describe a before and after 
situation.  
Continuity across paragraphs should be maintained and to signal to the reader how you 
are moving on by the use of linking words or phras es: such as however, similarly, 
consequently, as a result, on the other hand , etc. The main body should present a balanced 
view and all aspect of the title are given adequate coverage. 
The Conclusion. 
A good conclusion signals to the reader that the essay has ended. It should show the 
reader/examiner how the essay answered what was required of you. Ensure that all the 
ideas or arguments presented in the main body are summarised and set out in the 
conclusion. Some essays require that you state an opinion, i.e. come to a conclusion . 
Summarise the main arguments which support your view, not the ones that weaken your 
judgement. Make it clear what implications flow from your conclusion. While the 
introduction and the conclusion should agree with each other and never be contradictory, 
avoid the temptation to repeat the introduction or introduce new information. The 
conclusion is normally about the same length as or shorter than the introduction.  
 
Short Answer Questions (SAQs) 
 
SAQs are similar to essay-type questions as they also consist of a statement and/or query 
on a topic together with a prompt. They are often used in examinations to expand the 
number of topics that can be tested in one section or paper.  Although they can be treated 
like mini-essays, the expec ted response is usually only one or two paragraphs long or 
might be set out as a list of items.  
The following approach to an SAQ should be taken. 
1. Begin by defining all the terms in the question and take note of any boundaries or 
parameters given e.g. if you are asked for two conditions, Don’t write out five 
hoping you get it right. Add supporting examples only if requested. 
2. Write the answer in simple concise sentences including only as much information 
as possible - this is more important than style. 
3. If you are asked to answer within a specific number of words, make sure that is 
what you do.  



 
16 | P a g e  
 
T.T.P.S. EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE DUTIES I SYLLABUS        JULY 2022 
      
Mini/Micro Case Study Questions (MCSQs) 
 
MCSQs briefly describe a sequence of events that result in a real -life problem or 
demonstrate the realistic effects of an issue. The examiner will ask one or more questions 
based on the one or two topics, relevant to the subject area being tested, that appear in 
the scenario. Your response should be based on your knowledge of laws, regulations, 
protocols or theories of the subject area.  
The following approach to an MCSQ should be taken. 
1. Read the questions at the end of the case or section of the case first. 
2. Determine which topic/s, concept/s, principle/s or process/es of the subject area 
appears to be the focus of the case and its questions.  
3. Underline the prompt and key terms in the questions 
4. Read the case carefully and draw lines linking statements or observations in the 
case with the questions. 
5. Answer each question in alignment with the prompt used in the question e.g. don’t 
just list recommended actions if you were asked to justify them  
6. Make appropriate recommendations which should be reasonable and state what 
outcomes can be expected if that action is taken 
7. Write only to the depth suggested by the allocation of marks. 



 
17 | P a g e  
 
T.T.P.S. EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE DUTIES I SYLLABUS        JULY 2022 
Sample Questions 
 
POLICE PROMOTION (MAIN) EXAMINATION TO THE RANK OF ---------------- 
SUBJECT   : POLICE DUTIES I 
DATE    :  
TIME ALLOWED  :  HOURS 
INSTRUCTIONS: 
 
THIS PAPER HAS THREE SECTIONS   
CANDIDATES MUST ATTEMPT ALL SECTIONS. THE EXAMINATION IS 
WORTH 100 MARKS. CANDIDATES ARE REQUIRED TO OBTAIN A MINIMUM 
OF 50% OF THE POSSIBLE MARKS. 
YOU ARE REMINDED OF THE NEED TO USE PROPER DICTION, CORRECT 
SPELLING, STANDARD GRAMMAR AND AN ORDERLY, LEGIBLE AND NEAT 
PRESENTATION OF YOUR WORK. 
 
WRITE YOUR EXAMINATION NUMBER ON THE COVER OF THE 
EXAMINATION ANSWER BOOKLET AND ON THE TOP OF EVERY PAGE 
THROUGHOUT THE BOOKLET. 
 
DO NOT WRITE YOUR NAME AND REGIMENTAL NUMBER IN RESPONSE TO 
ANY QUESTION 



 
18 | P a g e  
 
T.T.P.S. EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE DUTIES I SYLLABUS        JULY 2022 
Section 1A Multiple Choice Questions 
Instructions: This Section 1A consists of 20 multiple choice questions. Complete 
Section 1A by copying the question number  into your answer booklet and write the 
letter of your choice from the list of options 
 
1. Which of the following books must be kept on Licensed Premises by a person licensed 
to sell Spirits? 
A. Stock Book & Purchase Orders for Spirits Book 
B. Liquor License Act Book & Certificate Book 
C. Certificate Book & Stock Book 
D. Purchase Orders for Spirits Book & Certificate Book 
2. S.O. 52 section 2 deals with Permanent Records. Which of the following set of 
documents are included in the list of permanent records? 
A. Station diary, copies of D.Os. financial records, application forms 
B. Pocket dairy, Patrol Registers, TT Gazette, Register of completed books 
C. Station information file, copies of S.O.s, Rogue Gallery, TT Gazette  
D. Rogue Gallery, TT Gazette, JP Records, financial records 
3. The Senior Second Division Officer in charge of a station where a 
protest/demonstration is occurring may carry out all of the following actions EXCEPT 
A. Lecture subordinates on the system to be adopted at the scene  
B. Inform the First Division Officer in charge of the area of the incident 
C. Accompany a strength of officers to ascertain the situation 
D. Cause to be removed any obstacle to the free flow of traffic 
4. All of the following are circumstances under which a Police Officer can seize firearms 
and ammunition from a holder of a Firearm Users License EXCEPT 
A. By Court order 
B. At the discretion of a police officer 
C. Due to death of the holder 
D. Infirmity of the holder 
5. When handing over a loaded rifle or S.M.G, the officer handing over must: 
A. Remove the magazine, clear the mechanism and leave the working parts open 
B. Leave the magazine in, clear the mechanism and leave the working parts open 
C. Remove the magazine, clear the mechanism and leave the working parts closed. 
D. Leave the magazine in, clear the mechanism and leave the working parts closed 



 
19 | P a g e  
 
T.T.P.S. EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE DUTIES I SYLLABUS        JULY 2022 
6. A Police Officer who receives a report of a missing person shall transmit the description 
of the missing person to the Second Division Officer in which of the following Units 
A. Police Control 
B. Human Resources 
C. Kidnapping  
D. Gender-based Violence                                    
7. The category “Mental Health Officer” does NOT refer to a person designated  
A. Psychiatric Social Worker 
B. Registered Mental Nurse 
C. District Health Visitor 
D. Psychiatric Therapist 
8. It is NOT the responsibility of the SDO Charge Room to 
A. Return a prisoner’s property on release 
B. Prepare a prisoner’s property for Court 
C. Release property to a prisoner’s nominee 
D. Release property to a prisoner’s gaoler 
9. Which of the following circumstances does NOT allow for arrest without a warrant 
A. A member of the public makes a charge of aggravated assault and there is 
reasonable evidence of same 
B. A member of the public is found loitering in a public space without a satisfactory 
reason 
C. A member of the public suspects another of loitering because of his appearance 
D. A property owner who with reasonable cause suspects another of stealing his 
property.      
 
10.  Warning of Intended Prosecution may be served on the driver of a vehicle involved 
in an accident 
A. immediately on report  
B. for dangerous driving 
C. for threatening gestures to the other driver 
D. instead of a warrant of arrest                              
11.Which of the following information is NOT part of the briefing of officers dispatched 
on patrol duty,  
A. the location of vacant buildings; 
B. domestic violence reports; 



 
20 | P a g e  
 
T.T.P.S. EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE DUTIES I SYLLABUS        JULY 2022 
C. stolen vehicles 
D. missing persons 
12. Which of the following is NOT an action that should be taken by the Officer who 
arrives first on a Crime Scene?  
A. Take charge of the scene if you deem it not necessary to establish contact with Base  
B. Determine the dimensions of the crime scene and maintain control 
C. Prevent access by all persons to maintain crime scene in its original form 
D. Ensure that there is no potential for harm by hidden objects or persons on the 
scene. 
 
13. On arrival at the scene of a shooting crime, Officer J observes the victim, bleeding 
profusely from a chest wound and gasping for breath. The victim motions that he 
wishes to speak and the officer prepares to listen. Which statement BEST describes the 
type of evidence collected? 
A. Witness statement 
B. Dying declaration statement 
C. Statement under caution 
D. Compelled statement                             
14. Which of the following is NOT in complete accordance with the guideline provided 
by S.O.32 as it relates to interrogation of children and young persons? 
A. the consent of the suspect 
B. the presence of a parent or guardian 
C. the presence of the head teacher if at school 
D. the consent of any non-police officer present 
15. Which of the following is NOT a responsibility of the Police Officer granting bail in a 
Summary Offences matter? 
A. inform the prisoner of the date, time and Court of appearance; 
B. request the signature of the prisoner on the bail bond; 
C. give the duplicate of the Bail Bond to the prisoner; 
D. caution the prisoner that he can be sent to jail if he breaks the bond. 
 



 
21 | P a g e  
 
T.T.P.S. EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE DUTIES I SYLLABUS        JULY 2022 
16. Which of the following is NOT a function of the Property Manager when Dangerous 
Drugs are handed over. 
A. assess the quantity of Dangerous Drugs seized. 
B. ascertain the exact value of the Dangerous Drugs seized  
C. register particulars of the Dangerous Drugs seized 
D. record the in or out movement of the Dangerous Drugs to appropriate entities 
17. Reg. 138 of the Police Service Regulations 2007 requires that officers not publish 
personal comments on national or local political or administrative matters. However, 
such commentary may take place in any of the following circumstances EXCEPT 
A. The Commissioner has granted permission in writing. 
B. It is the official duty of the officer 
C. Communication channels other than radio, television, or Internet will be used. 
D. It is a standard presentation to a community group 
18. Which of the following is set out in S.O. 53 as a duty of the officer appointed to 
investigate a report of domestic violence? 
A. Render assistance where there is personal injury 
B. Dispatch a vehicle to the location of the report 
C. Record statements and initiate criminal proceedings where necessary 
D. Remain in communication with the victim at all times 
19. Which of the following documents is not a requirement of the driver/s involved in a 
road traffic accident? 
A. Driver's Permit 
B. Certificate of Insurance 
C. Proof of address 
D. Certified copy of ownership       
                           
20. Which of the following is one of the duties of a Police Officer investigating a report of 
fire  
A. preserve order and divert traffic 
B. arrange for the visit of a Scientific Officer if necessary  
C. consult the most Senior Fire Officer at the scene of the fire; 
D. ascertain whether the cause of the fire has criminal implications 



 
22 | P a g e  
 
T.T.P.S. EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE DUTIES I SYLLABUS        JULY 2022 
Section 1B True/False Questions 
 
Instructions: This Section 1B has 10 Questions for you to label TRUE or FALSE.  
Complete Section 1B by copying the question number  into your answer booklet and 
write True /T OR False/F next to the number. 
  
1.  The Trinidad and Tobago Police Service Strategic Plan for 2019 -2021 aims to heighten 
Community Partnerships.  
 
2.  When handing over a loaded shotgun, the weapon shall be held with the muzzle 
pointing downwards.  
 
3. Witnesses to crime should report all aliases used to refer to him/her.  
 
4.  Recording in writing the statement of an accused who although cautioned and told of 
his rights, blurted out that he had killed the woman for a fee constitutes a breach of 
the Judges Rule.  
 
5.  The difference between classifying malicious damage as a major crime and malicious 
damage as a minor crime is based on the age of the perpetrator or suspect as reported 
by the owner of the damaged property.  
 
6. “Handover” refers only to the physical check by the officer taking o f property not 
lodged with the General Property Manager.  
 
7.  A Justice of the Peace is an ex officio Commissioner of Affidavits.  
 
8.  Modes of identification include voice.  
 
9.  A guiding value as stated in the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service Strategic Plan for 
2019-2021 is responsibility.  
 
10. Inspectors may make the final decision as to how a crime is classified.  
  



 
23 | P a g e  
 
T.T.P.S. EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE DUTIES I SYLLABUS        JULY 2022 
Section 1C Short Answer Questions (5 marks each) 
Instructions: This Section 1C comprises five examples of short answer questions.  
Copy the question number  into your answer booklet and respond as necessary or 
follow the individual question’s requirements. 
 
1.  As the S.D.O in charge of your station you are required to lecture to your supervisees 
on the proviso of Section 104 of the Summary Courts Act Chapter 4:20 as it relates to 
the arrest of offenders in certain cases. (5m) 
 
2.  Advise subordinates of any five of the thirteen rules for the proper keeping of the 
Station Diary. (5m)  
 
3.  Copy the following table and indicate in the column on the right the action expected 
of the Police O fficer who is recording a witness statement under the following 
circumstances. 
SITUATION EXPECTED ACTION  
The witness cannot read 
(1m) 
 
Changes have been made to 
the written statement (2m) 
 
The witness cannot sign her 
name. (2m) 
 
 
4.  As a Sergeant attached to a station you are appointed to investigate an application for 
a Dance Hall Licence. List four activities you should carry out as the investigator? 
(5m)  
 
5.  In accordance with S.O. 53 Sec. 7 & Sec. 8, outline clearly how the duties of the officer 
to whom a report of domestic violence is referred differ from that of the officer 
appointed to investigate the report? 
 
6.  Examine each of the following statements and indicate whether or not there was a 
breach of the Judges Rules? Provide a brief support for your answer.  



 
24 | P a g e  
 
T.T.P.S. EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE DUTIES I SYLLABUS        JULY 2022 
a. All of the persons at the scene of the crime were questioned by the police officers 
and written statements produced. (1m) 
b. A suspect who was shot by a security guard in an attempted robbery was 
subjected to interviews while undergoing medical treatment and gave 
confessionary admissions that were recorded. He was subsequently charged. 
(2m) 
c. The close relative of a complainant was advised of impending prosecution and 
told of his rights to say nothing, but that whatever he did say would be recorded 
and may be used as evidence. He chose to give a written statement. (2m) 
 
Section 2 Mini-cases 
Instructions: This Section has 2 mini-cases followed by 3-5 questions. The total marks 
per case is either 15 marks or 10 marks. Complete  this Section by copying the Case 
number and Question number into your answer booklet and write appropriate 
responses to each question. 
 
MINI-CASE 1 (CORPORAL/SERGEANT) 15m 
You are the Corporal/Sergeant in charge of a squad deployed to respond to a call by  a 
shop-keeper who claims to have made an arrest of a thief.  On arrival at the scene at 
5.15.p.m. you are furnished with a brief account of the event as outlined hereunder and 
made certain observations. 
At 3.00p.m. on Friday 7 th 20…, “Lefty” Hand had entered the mini -mart belonging to 
owner Salty Marsh requesting to make a purchase. At that time, the only other person 
present was 12 -year-old Romey Lands, Salty’s neighbour and customer. “Lefty” was 
refused service by the cashier, Pansy Hooper, as he was not wearing his face -mask 
properly as required by the clearly -visible sign. Lefty protested and became enraged 
when he was refused service again. Lefty proceeded to grab two tins of corned beef, a six-
pack of beer and a loaf of brea d valued $80 in total and ran for the door. In his hurry, 
Lefty dropped the beer which shattered and broke a glass display case valued at $999.  
The remains of the case and the bottles had been swept up and were lying in the eastern 
corner of the shop. Salty had intervened by grabbing Lefty, tying his hands and making 
him sit on the floor. Salty had informed Lefty that he was being arrested for stealing and 
damage to property. Two hours passed before Salty called the police station to relate the 
incident. O n your arrival, Lefty complained loudly of being kidnapped by Salty and 
demanded justice.  However, he refused to make a statement confirming or denying the 
incident until his relative arrived. The alleged thief, Lefty, was taken to the station and 
on the arrival of his mother and his attorney agreed to make a statement. 
 
 



 
25 | P a g e  
 
T.T.P.S. EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE DUTIES I SYLLABUS        JULY 2022 
Questions 
1.  Section 3 of the Criminal Law Act 10:04 make provision for the power of arrest 
without a warrant by civilians and police officers. State whether Salty has acted in 
accordance with such provisions. Indicate one such provision in support of your 
answer? (3m) 
2. In accordance with the Section 104 of the Summary Court Act Chapter 4:20 What is 
the responsibility of the person making an arrest in the circumstance described above? 
(2m) 
3.  Complete the table below by outlining the guideline to be followed in taking 
statements from the four persons known to be at the scene at the time of the incident. 
(6m) 
Romey (2m)  
Pansy (1m)  
Salty(1m)  
Lefty (2m)  
 
4.  Outline the steps to be taken to classify and record this incident on your return to the 
station in light of Salty’s claim. (4m) 
 
MINI CASE 2 (INSPECTOR) 10m 
You are the inspector contacted by the Sergeant in charge of the CID, who requested that 
you conduct an Identification Parade involving two suspects who allegedly committed a 
robbery. You are furnished with a brief account of the facts as outlined hereunder:  
Victim No. 1 Marcia Smith.  
Address: C/O More for Less Supermarket NO. 125 Eastern Main Road Tunapuna 
Victim. No. 2 Ben Hogan. 
 Address: Horner Man Lane Diego Martin. 
Around 9.30 am on Tuesday 14th May 2022 Victim No.1 who is employed as a Cashier at 
the More for Less Supermarket situated at NO. 125 Eastern Main Road Tunapuna was 
sitting behind the Cash Register at her workplace. At that time, she was speaking to 
Victim No. 2 who is a Sales Representative employed with Good Life Sales Distributors, 
and who was about to leave the Supermarket but stopped to speak to Victim No. 1. 



 
26 | P a g e  
 
T.T.P.S. EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE DUTIES I SYLLABUS        JULY 2022 
Since there was no customer waiting to cash  at the time, Victim No. 1 began speaking 
with Victim No.  2 and whilst doing so, they were confronted by the two men, who 
announced a hold-up. One of the men, who is Suspect No. 1  was armed with a Firearm, 
whilst the other who is Suspect No. 2 was armed with a cutlass.  
 Suspect No. 1 then proceeded to rob the Cashier who is victim No. 1 of the cash in the 
Cash Register which amounted to $12, 045.00 and her gold chain value $1400.00 from 
around her neck. Whilst Suspect No. 2 robbed Victim No. 2 of his wallet  containing 
$800.00 Trinidad and Tobago Currency, and his gold bracelet value $5000.00. The 
suspects then made their escape on foot by running west along t he Eastern Main Road 
Tunapuna. S uspect No . 1 was subsequently arrested and is to be placed on an 
identification parade. 
Description: Suspects No. 1. Brown complexion. 5 feet 10 inches tall. Slim Built,   
                                                Oval shaped face. Low haircut. 
 
In accordance with the procedure as outlined in S.O . 29 of the Trinidad and Tobago 
Standing Orders, you are to answer the following questions. 
 
1.  State exactly what the suspect will be told on your arrival at the station and what you 
are required to do thereafter in order to have the identification parade  carried out. 
(2m) 
2.  State what you are required to do after the men to form the Parade assemble in the 
area of the Identification Parade Room. (2m) 
3.  State clearly the information that must be provided to the suspect before the witness 
is called. (2m) 
4.  State clearly what you would do from the moment the first witness is called and enters 
the Identification Parade Room. (2m) 
 5. The first witness (Victim No.1) identifies the Suspect as the man who robbed her. State 
in detail what you are now required to do. (2m) 
  



 
27 | P a g e  
 
T.T.P.S. EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE DUTIES I SYLLABUS        JULY 2022 
Section 3 Essay-Type Questions 
Instructions: This Section comprises examples of essay -type questions.  Copy your  
choice of question into your answer booklet and respond in the format of an essay of 
no more than 250 words. (Note that marks will be awarded as follows: - (a) For Corporal 
Examinations: - Content (35m), Use of English language (5m), (b) For Sergeant and 
Inspector examinations: - Content (18m), Use of English language (2m).  
 
Question 1 Corporal  
Given the prevalence of gun crimes, the issuing of firearm user’s licence/ firearm’s user’s 
(employee’s) certificate has become a contentious issue in the public domain. Provide an 
essay for publication that sets out the following information.  
(a) The meaning of the following terms under the Firearms Act Chapter 16:01             
- Firearm Users Licence (F.U.L.) 
- Firearm’s User’s (Employee’s) Certificate (F.U.E.C.) (4m) 
(b) The four (4) categories of persons who may be granted a F.U.L. or F.U.E.C.  (8m) 
(c) The requirements of civilians when applying for either the F.U.L. or the F.U.E.C.  
(2m) 
(d) Any eight (8) items of information that should be recorded from an interview of an 
applicant for a F.U.L. or F.U.E.C.        (16m) 
(e) Any three (3) circumstances und er which an officer can seize firearms and 
ammunition from holders.       (3m) 
(f) Any two reasons why a firearm may be surrendered to the Police.      (2m)  
 
Question 2 Sergeant (20m) 
 
In the recent past, the media has had cause to highlight a number of incidents involving 
police vehicles. Questions have been raised about the standard operating procedures for 
drivers and inspectors of police vehicles. Based on your knowledge of S.O.49, explain the 
following to officers under your command:  
a. The two requirements for someone to assume the role of “police driver”.       (2m) 
b. The difference between a “Vehicle History Sheet” and a “Vehicle Job Sheet” (2m) 
c. The duties of a police driver on  
i. assumption of duty                 (2m) 
ii. completion of duty                  (4m) 



 
28 | P a g e  
 
T.T.P.S. EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE DUTIES I SYLLABUS        JULY 2022 
iii. the occurrence of an incident or accident                                 (4m) 
d. Four actions of the SDO in charge of a station if defects or damages are observed at 
the weekly inspection.                                                                      (4m) 
 
Question 3 Inspector  (20m) 
The Head of your Division has recently briefed officers on the number of cases lost in 
court because of incorrect taking of statements. You have been asked to prepare an essay 
based on S.O. 32 to be used as training material for a group of officers recently posted to 
your station. Write an essay highlighting the following areas of S.O.32 
a. The purpose of written statements      (3m) 
b. The procedure for handling prepared statements.      (3m)  
c. The five (5) guidelines for “Recording Statements”.    (5 m) 
d. The fundamental condition of admissibility (of a statement) in evidence and what 
happens if non-conformity occurs.      (3m) 
e. The first and second duty of the polic e officer who has gathered a reasonable 
amount of evidence that a suspect has committed an offence.              (4m) 
 
  



 
29 | P a g e  
 
T.T.P.S. EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE DUTIES I SYLLABUS        JULY 2022 
Provision of source material for answers 
 
Section 1A Multiple Choice Questions 
1.  C S.O 22 Sec 10 11 B S.O. 11 Sec 10 
2.  C S.O. 52 Sec 2  12 A S.O. 28 Sec 12 
3.  A S.O. 54 Sec 5 13 B S.O. 32 Sec 4 
4.  B S.O. 40 Sec 16 14 D S.O. 32 Sec 4  
5.  A S.O. 41 Sec 15 15 D Bail Act 4:60 as amended 
6.  A S.O. 51 Sec 4 16 B S.O. 26 Sec 24 
7.  D S.O. 33 Sec 4 17 C Reg. 138 
8.  B S.O. 26 Sec 17 18 D S.O. 53 Sec 8 
9.  C Criminal Law Act 
Ch. 10:04 Sec 3 
19 C S.O. 44 Sec 36 
10.  A S.O. 44 Sec 36 20 A S.O. 34 Sec 6 
 
Section 1B True/False Questions 
1 The Trinidad and Tobago Police Service Strategic Plan 
for 2019 -2021 aims to heighten Community 
Partnerships.  
T TTPS 
Strategic Plan 
2019-2021 
2. When handing over a loaded shotgun, the weapon shall 
be held with the muzzle pointing downwards.  
F S.O. 41 Sec 15 
3. Witnesses to crime should report all aliases used to refer 
to him/her.  
T S.O. 32 Sec 2 
4. Recording in writing the s tatement of an accused  who 
although cautioned and told of his rights, blurted out 
that he had killed the woman for a fee constitutes a 
breach of the Judges Rule. 
F Judges Rule II 



 
30 | P a g e  
 
T.T.P.S. EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE DUTIES I SYLLABUS        JULY 2022 
5. The difference between classifying malicious damage as 
a major crime and malicious damage as a minor crime 
is based on the age of the perpetrator or suspect as 
reported by the owner of the damaged property.  
F S.O. 28 Codes 
41 and 89 
6. “Handover” refers only to the physical check by the 
officer taking of property not lodged with the General 
Property Manager. 
F S.O. 9 Sec 1 
7. A Justice of the Peace is an ex officio Commissioner of 
Affidavits.  
T S.O. 46 Sec 6 
8 Modes of identification include voice.  T S.O. 29 Sec 5 
9. A guiding value as stated in the Trinidad and Tobago 
Police Service Strategic Plan for 2019 -2021 is 
responsibility.  
F TTPS 
Strategic Plan 
2019-2021 
10..  
 
Inspectors may make the final decision as to how a 
crime is classified 
T S.O. 28 Sec 3 
 
Section 1C Short Answer Questions 
Question 1 Summary Courts Act Chapter 4:20 
Arrest of offenders in certain cases Section 104 
 
Question 2  S.O. 17  
Keeping of Station Diary Sec. 4 
 
Question 3.    S.O. 32  
SITUATION EXPECTED ACTION  
The witness cannot read 
(1m) 
Read the statement carefully to the witness; 
Changes have been made to 
the written statement (2m) 
ensure that all additions, corrections and alterations to 
the statement are initialed by the witness 



 
31 | P a g e  
 
T.T.P.S. EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE DUTIES I SYLLABUS        JULY 2022 
The witness cannot sign her 
name. (2m) 
Ask that the witness make her “mark” or place her 
“thumb print” in the areas specified 
 
Question 4.  S.O. 22  
Duties of an Investigating Officer for Theatre/Dance Hall Part IX Sec 99 
. 
Question 5.  S.O. 53 
Duties of officer to whom report is referred (2m) Sec. 7 
Duties of investigative officer (2m) Sec. 8 
Attempt made to differentiate duties (1m) 
 
Question 6 
SITUATION Choice Support 
All of the persons at the scene of 
the crime were questioned by the 
police officers and written 
statements produced (1m) 
 
No 
breach 
(1m) 
Rule I. When a police officer is trying to 
discover whether or by whom, an offence 
has been committed he is entitled to 
question any person, whether “suspected 
or not”, from whom he thinks that useful 
information may be obtained. 
A suspect who was shot by a 
security guard in an attempted 
robbery was subjected to 
interviews while undergoing 
medical treatment and gave 
confessionary admissions that 
were recorded. He was 
subsequently charged. (2m) 
 
Breach 
(1m) 
Rule II. As soon as a police officer has 
evidence which could afford reasonable 
grounds for suspecting that a person has 
committed an offence, he shall caution 
that person or cause him to be cautioned 
before putting to him any questions, or 
further questions.(1m) 
The close rel ative of a 
complainant was advised of 
impending prosecution and told 
of his rights to say nothing but 
No 
breach 
(1m) 
Rule III. Where a person is informed that 
he may be prosecuted for an offence he 
shall be cautioned using terms as directed 



 
32 | P a g e  
 
T.T.P.S. EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE DUTIES I SYLLABUS        JULY 2022 
that whatever he did say would be 
record in writing and may be used 
as evidence. He chose to give a 
written statement. (2m) 
 
and a statement must be recorded in 
writing and signed. (1m) 
 
Section 2 Mini-Cases  
MINI-CASE 1 
1.  Section 3 of the Criminal Law Act 10:04 make provision for 
the power of arrest without a warrant by civilians and police 
officers. State whether Salty has acted in accordance with 
such provisions. Indicate one such provision in support of 
your answer? (3m) 
Criminal Law Act 
10:04 Sec 3 
2.  In accordance with the Section 104 of the Summary Court Act 
Chapter 4:20 What is the responsibility of the person making 
an arrest in the circumstance described above? (2m) 
Criminal Law Act 
10:04 Sec 3 
3. Complete the table below by outlining the guideline t o be 
followed in taking statements from the four persons known 
to be at the scene at the time of the incident. (6m) 
S.O. 32 Sec 4 
4. Outline the steps to be taken to classify and record this 
incident on your return to the station in light of Salty’s claim. 
(4m) 
S.O. 28 Sec 4 
 
MINI-CASE 2 
 
Procedures for the holding of an Identification Parade (Inspector) 
1 State exactly what the suspect will be told on your 
arrival at the station and what you are required to do 
thereafter in order to have the identification parade 
carried out. (2m) 
S.O. 29 Section 8 or 
Gazette 190 of 1994 
 
2 State what you are required to do after the men to 
form the Parade assemble in the area of the 
Identification Parade Room. (2m) 
S.O. 29 Section 9 or 
Gazette 190 of 1994 



 
33 | P a g e  
 
T.T.P.S. EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE DUTIES I SYLLABUS        JULY 2022 
3 State clearly the information that must be provided to 
the suspect before the witness is called. (2m) 
S.O. 29 Section 9(g 1 -4) 
(exact answer to be 
given) 
4 State clearly what you would do from the moment the 
first witness is called and enters the Identif ication 
Parade Room. (2 m) 
S.O. 29 or Gazette 190 of 
1994 
5 The first witness (Victim No.1) identifies the Suspect 
as the man who robbed her. State in detail what you 
are now required to do. (2m) 
S.O. 29  
  
Section 3 Essay-Type Questions 
 
Question 1 S.O. 40 
a)   The meaning of the following terms under the Firearms Act Chapter 
16:01             
- Firearm Users Licence (F.U.L.) 
- Firearm’s User’s (Employee’s) Certificate (F.U.E.C.) (4m)                                
Secs 1 and 2 
(b)  The four (4) categories of persons who may be granted a F.U.L. or 
F.U.E.C.    (8m) 
Sec 4 
(c )  The requirements of civilians when applying for either the F.U.L. 
or the F.U.E.C.  (2m) 
Sec 5 
(d)  Any eight (8) items of information that should be recorded from an 
interview of an applicant for a F.U.L. or F.U.E.C.            (16m) 
Sec 8 
(e) Any three (3) circumstances under which an officer can seize 
firearms and ammunition from holders.       (3m) 
Sec 16 
(f)  Any two reasons why a firearm may be surrendered to the Police                                                                                        
(2m) 
Sec 17 
 
Question 2 S.O.49   
a. The two requirements for someone to assume the role of “police 
driver”. (2m) 
Sec 1 



 
34 | P a g e  
 
T.T.P.S. EXAMINATION BOARD POLICE DUTIES I SYLLABUS        JULY 2022 
b.  The difference between a “Vehicle History Sheet” and a “Vehicle 
Job Sheet” (2m) 
Secs 2 and 3 
e.   The duties of a police driver on  
i. assumption of duty                            (2m) 
ii. completion of duty                             (4m) 
iii. the occurrence of an incident or accident   (4m) 
 
 
Sec 14 
d.    Four actions of the SDO in charge of a station if defects or damages 
are observed at the weekly inspection.               (4m) 
 
Sec 13 
 
Question 3 S.O. 32 
a. The purpose of written statements         (3m) Sec 3 
b. The procedure fo r handling prepared statements  (3m)
  Sec 2 Part 1      
c. The five (5) guidelines for “Recording Statements”.  (5 m) 
 
Sec 2 Part 
2 
d. The fundamental condition of admissibility (of a statement) 
in evidence and what happens if non -conformity occurs.                             
(3m)                 
Appendix 
A (e) 
e. The first and second duty of the police officer who has 
gathered a reasonable amount of evidence that the suspect 
has committed an offence.                   (4m) 
Judges Rule 
II 
 
 