2024 POLICE PROMOTION (MAIN) EXAMINATION
TO THE RANK OF SERGEANT

SUBJECT : POLICE DUTIES I
DATE : 167 NOVEMBER, 2024
TIME ALLOWED : 3 HOURS
INSTRUCTIONS:
THIS PAPER HAS THREE (3) SECTIONS, CANDIDATES MUST ATTEMPT ALL
SECTIONS.
THE EXAMINATION IS WORTH 100 MARKS.
CANDIDATES ARE REQUIRED TO OBTAIN A MINIMUM OF 50% OF THE
POSSIBLE MARKS IN EACH SECTION.
IN A BLACK OR BLUE INK PEN, WRITE YOUR EXAMINATION NUMBER ON THE
COVER OF THE EXAMINATION ANSWER BOOKLET AND ON THE TOP OF
EVERY PAGE THROUGHOUT THE BOOKLET.
YOU ARE REMINDED OF THE NEED TO USE PROPER DICTION, CORRECT
SPELLING, STANDARD GRAMMAR AND AN ORDERLY, LEGIBLE AND NEAT
PRESENTATION OF YOUR WORK.
EACH SECTION MUST BEGIN ON A NEW PAGE.
DO NOT WRITE YOUR NAME, INITIALS OR REGIMENTAL NUMBER
ANYWHERE IN YOUR EXAMINATION ANSWER BOOKLET.
DO NOT IDENTIFY YOURSELF IN ANYWAY OTHER THAN YOUR
EXAMINATION CANDIDATE NUMBER.
NB:- QUESTIONS ANSWERED IN EXCESS WILL NOT BE CORRECTED.


--- page break ---

SECTION 1A ~ MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS (1 mark each) Total 10 marks
Instructions: This Section consists of ten (10) multiple choice questions. Complete
this Section 1A by copying the question number into your answer booklet and write
the letter of your choice from the list of options.

1. Inaccordance with Regulation 109 of the Police Service Regulations 2007, all of the
undermentioned correctly represent the numerical strength to be provided for the
removal of prisoners except:

(A) One prisoner shall be accompanied by at least one officer.

(B) One prisoner shall be accompanied by at least two officers.

(C) Two to five prisoners shall be accompanied by at least two officers.
(D) Six to ten prisoners shall be accompanied by at least three officers.

2. In accordance with Paragraph 10 of Standing Order 22, which of the following
books must be kept on Licensed Premises by a person licensed to sell Spirits?
(A) Certificate Book and Stock Book.

(B) Stock Book and Purchase Orders for Spirits Book.
(C) Liquor License Act Book and Certificate Book.
(D) Purchase Orders for Spirits Book and Certificate Book.

3. Inaccordance with Paragraph 5 of Standing Order 54, which of the following is not
a duty of the Second Division Officer in charge of the station in a district where a
protest/ demonstration is occurring?

(A) Appraise the First Division Officer in charge of the area.

(B) Detail a strength of Police Officers for immediate dispatch to the scene.
(C) Ensure prompt remedial action is taken.

(D) Request additional strength from the Divisional Commander.

4. In accordance with Paragraph 67 of Standing Order 22, the Visiting Officer to
Precious Metals and Stones (Jewellery Shop) need not ensure that: -

(A) there is a signboard affixed to the premises containing the required
specifications.

(B) the receipt and delivery books are kept and maintained

(C) the Precious Metals and Stones purchased or received by the Licensed
Dealer are not altered in any way for at least a period of ten (10) days after
purchase or receipt.

(D) the layout, character, condition or location of the premises is situated for
use as a Jewellery Shop.

d


--- page break ---

9. There is an application for an order to record a club on the Register of Members’
; Club. Which of the following is not in complete compliance with the guidelines
provided in Paragraph 16 of Standing Order 22?
(A) The requirement for a statement signed by the Secretary of the Club.
(B) The submission of a copy of the existing rules of the Club.
(C) The applicant, applying in his own name for the registration of the Club.
(D) A duly certified copy of an audited Balance Sheet and Revenue Account
for the preceding financial year of the Club.
6. Which of the following is not a purpose of the Judges Rules No. HA 8/11/22, dated
January 15, 1965?
(A) To provide a means whereby as far as possible, an offended person can
obtain redress for a grievance suffered.
(B) To afford safeguards to the Police who act in accordance with the Rules.
(C) To standardize procedure in all forces and for all courts.
(D) To protect a prisoner from improper action by ensuring that statements
made by them are given voluntarily.
7. Which of the following statement is not in accordance with Standing Order 26 as it
relates to the procedure for dealing with dangerous drugs?
(A) The Dangerous Drugs Property Manager shall have the sole responsibility
for making entries in the Dangerous Drugs Register.
(B) The Head of a Division shall appoint an Officer of the rank of Sergeant and
above to be a Dangerous Drugs Property Manager.
(C) Dangerous Drugs seized and brought to the station shall be handed over
to the Dangerous Drugs Property Manager.
(D) Dangerous drugs seized in a case must be taken by the complainant
personally to the Forensic Laboratory for analysis.
8. Which of the following is included in Part 2 of Departmental Order 254 dated
20/09/2006?
(A) Philosophy of Policing for the People.
(B) Amendment Paragraph 5 of Standing Order 6 addressing Appearance and
Turnout.
(C) Amendment of the requirements of Standing Order 17 as it relates to
Handing Over of the Charge Room by Second Division Officers.
(D) Guidelines that govern the use of force by Police Officers.


--- page break ---

9. In accordance with Regulation 109 of the Police Service Regulations which of the
following is not correct as it relates to the numerical strength of escort to be :
provided for the removal of prisoners, except those conveyed in a prison van?

(A) One prisoner shall be accompanied by at least one officer.

(B) Two prisoners shall be accompanied by at least three officers.

(C) Two to five prisoners shall be accompanied by at least two officers.
(D) Six to ten prisoners shall be accompanied by at least three officers.

10. In accordance with Paragraph 14 of Standing Order 53, a Police Officer who has

entered premises without a warrant should take the following actions except:

(A) give assistance to a person who has suffered injury;

(B) ensure the welfare and safety of a child who may be on the premises;

(C) ensure that the decision in a protection order is communicated to the
informant.

(D) prevent any further breach of the law.

SECTION 1B - TRUE/FALSE QUESTIONS (1 mark each) Total 10 marks

Instructions: This Section has ten (10) questions for you to label TRUE or FALSE.

Complete Section 1B by copying the question number into your answer booklet and write

True/T OR False/F next to the number:

1. Section 111(1) of the Summary Offences Act Chapter 11:02 states the guidelines
given to police officers concerning the dispersing of persons in a public meeting.

2. Regulation 138 of the Police Service Regulations 2007, requires a police officer not
to publish personal comments on political or administrative matters

3. The Judges’ Rules for Children 2016 apply to Police Officers and other Persons
investigating a report where a child has been accused of an offence.

4. The procedure for destroying dangerous drugs is provided for in Paragraph 23
(2) of Standing Order 26.

5. In accordance with Paragraph 1 of Standing Order 51 as amended by Part II in
Departmental Order No. 52 dated Thursday March 2, 2006, “Missing Person”
refers to a person who has not been seen or heard from for a period in excess of
twenty-four (24) hours.

6. Police Officers of the rank of Corporal or above are authorized to grant bail to a
person arrested without a warrant for a Summary Offence, if it is not practicable
to bring such persons before a Magistrate or Justice of the Peace within forty-
eight (48) hours after he/she was taken into custody.

7. Paragraph 21(1) of Standing Order 41 identifies the conditions under which an
officer who was issued with a personal firearm should return it to the Police
Armory.


--- page break ---

8. In accordance with Departmental Order No. 254, dated Wednesday September
- 20, 2026 the final classification of crimes and all incident report forms shall be
made by an officer holding the rank of Corporal and above.

9. In accordance with Regulation 107 of the Police Service Regulations 2007, the
legal adviser of a prisoner is allowed to communicate with the prisoner in private
at a Police Station.

10. In accordance with Paragraph 1 of Standing Order 41, “Firearm User’s License”
refers to a license issued by the Commissioner of Police, authorizing the holder
thereof, subject to the terms and conditions specified in the License, to be in
possession of the firearm and ammunition so specified.

SECTION 1C - SHORT ANSWER QUESTIONS (2 marks each) Total 10 marks

Instructions: This Section 1C comprises five (5) short answer questions. Copy the Section

and the question number into your answer booklet and respond as necessary or follow

the individual question’s requirements.

1. In accordance with Standing Order 16, state the main factors with regard to
the “Inspection and Initialing of the Official Pocket Diary.”

2. In accordance with Section 111 of the Summary Offences Act Chapter 11:02
explain the provision for the holding of a public meeting.

3. In accordance with Standing Order 51, as amended by Departmental Order
52/2006, list two (2) of your duties on receipt of a report of a missing person.

4. In accordance with Paragraph 27 of Standing Order 41, state two (2) of the
duties of the Second Division Officer in charge of a station where an Officer
has been threatened while performing official duties.

5. List two (2) of the duties of a Police Officer who is detailed to investigate an
application for Dance Hall License?

SECTION 2 - MINI CASE STUDY Total (30 marks)
Instructions: This Section comprises two (2) mini case study questions for 15 marks each.
Copy the Section and question number into your answer booklet and respond as required.

1. Over the last ten years there have been numerous complaints against the Trinidad and
Tobago Police Service regarding their service delivery. Public complaints focus on the
Police Service’s inability to respond in a timely manner. The lack of functioning vehicles
has been cited as a contributory factor to this situation. In response, millions of dollars
were spent on the acquisition of new vehicles. Despite this investment, the Police Service
continues to be hamstrung by a lack of mobility.

An audit was conducted to assess the extent to which the Police Service properly
managed and maintained its vehicles. Evidence was taken from the records of the “repair
centres” and in police station premises. It was discovered that there was inept care and
maintenance of police vehicles.

With reference to the issues raised in the case, answer the following questions.


--- page break ---

(A) List five (5) of the responsibilities of the Officer in charge of the |

station in accordance with paragraph 13 of Standing order 49. (5 marks)
(B) From your experience, name two (2) of the observations that are

likely to appear as evidence in the audit. (4 marks)
(C) Based on the results of the audit, outline and justify a strategy for the

future management, care and maintenance of vehicles within the

Police Service? (6 marks)

2. Recently there was a report of wounding at a school in your station district involving the

parents of two students. In brief, in September 2024 Venezuelan children were given the
opportunity to attend school in Trinidad and Tobago for the first time. On Monday
September 2, 2024 the first day of school two of those students got into an altercation and
their parents who were waiting outside the school intervened to calm them down. In
doing so both parents attacked and wounded each other with knives. At the time of the
incident Constables Jones and John who are officers at your station were also waiting
outside the school for their children. The officers disarmed both of the parents arrested
them and took them the station. They made a report to you as the sergeant at the station
who conducted an interview of parents who were arrested.
While conducting the investigation, it was observed that the parents’ had a limited
understanding of English.
In view of the aforementioned fact:
(A) Explain Rule 1 of the Judges Rules in terms of the Police Officers who

are investigating this specific crime. (4 marks)
(B) Outline the procedures for recording statements made by the parents

in accordance with the Administrative Directive No. 1 of the Judges

Rules. (4 marks)
(C) Explain record of interrogation presented in the Administrative

Directive No, 2 of the Judges Rules. (4 marks)
(D) Advise of the procedure stipulated in the Administrative Directive

No. 5 of the Judges Rules for interrogation of foreigners. (3 marks)

SECTION 3 - ESSAY QUESTIONS Total (40 marks)

Instructions: This Section comprises four (4) essay questions. You are required to answer

any TWO (2). Copy the question number into your answer booklet and respond in the

format of an essay of no more than 250 words. (Note that marks will be awarded as follows:

- Content 36 marks, Use of English Language 4 marks).

1. Show how the knowledge of Standing Order 22, Paragraph 103 will assist you in
pertorming your responsibilities as a visiting officer to a Theatre/Dance Hall
establishment.

2. Based on the requirements of the Judges’ Rules for Children 2016, explain Rule 1 in
terms of the General principles for stop and search of a child.

3. In accordance with Paragraph 15 of Standing Order 41, discuss the general guidelines
of Police Officers when handing over or receiving firearms.


--- page break ---

| 4. In accordance with Paragraph 34 of Standing Order 26, illustrate the general
instructions applicable to the duties of Property Managers where property is concern,
include Dangerous Drugs.


--- page break ---

