2024 POLICE PROMOTION (MAIN) EXAMINATION
TO THE RANK OF SERGEANT
SUBJECT : POLICE DUTIES II - INVESTIGATIONS,
EVIDENCE AND PROCEDURES
DATE : 23'4 NOVEMBER, 2024
TIME ALLOWED : 3 HOURS
INSTRUCTIONS:
THIS PAPER HAS THREE (3) SECTIONS, CANDIDATES MUST ATTEMPT ALL
SECTIONS.
THE EXAMINATION IS WORTH 100 MARKS.
CANDIDATES ARE REQUIRED TO OBTAIN A MINIMUM OF 50% OF THE
POSSIBLE MARKS IN EACH SECTION.
IN A BLACK OR BLUE INK PEN, WRITE YOUR EXAMINATION NUMBER ON THE
COVER OF THE EXAMINATION ANSWER BOOKLET AND ON THE TOP OF EVERY
PAGE THROUGHOUT THE BOOKLET.
YOU ARE REMINDED OF THE NEED TO USE PROPER DICTION, CORRECT
SPELLING, STANDARD GRAMMAR AND AN ORDERLY, LEGIBLE AND NEAT
PRESENTATION OF YOUR WORK.
EACH SECTION MUST BEGIN ON A NEW PAGE.
DO NOT WRITE YOUR NAME, INITIALS OR REGIMENTAL NUMBER
ANYWHERE IN YOUR EXAMINATION ANSWER BOOKLET.
DO NOT IDENTIFY YOURSELF IN ANYWAY OTHER THAN YOUR
EXAMINATION CANDIDATE NUMBER.
NB:- QUESTIONS ANSWERED IN EXCESS WILL NOT BE CORRECTED.


--- page break ---

SECTION 1A - MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS (1 mark each) Total 10 marks
Instructions: This section consists of ten (10) multiple choice questions. Complete this
Section 1A by copying the question number into your answer booklet and write the
letter of your choice from the list of options.
1. Which of the following is a non-bailable offence?
(A) Murder
(B) Sedition
(C) Treason
(D) Rape
2. Where an accused person is charged for an offence, a prosecutor may object to
bail on one of the following grounds.
(A) | The accused person if released on bail would fail to attend
(B) The accused person may interfere with witnesses
(C) The accused person is charged for an offence whilst on bail
(D) All of the above
3. The Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Act Chap 48:50, Sec. 66(a) creates the offence
of “failing to comply with the directive of a police constable”, which of the following
is the penalty?
(A) — $1,000.00 and 3 demerit points
(B) $1,000.00 and 4 demerit points
(C) — $2,000.00 and 3 demerit points
(D) $2,000.00 and 4 demerit points
4. Which of the following defines the meaning of the term “sub judice”?
(A) The matter has been completed before the court
(B) The matter is before the court for determination
(C) The matter is still under investigation
(D) None of the above
9. The Larceny Act Chap. 11:12, Sec.28 creates the offence of “house breaking and
committing an arrestable offence’. Which of the following does not constitute an
element to prove the offence?
(A) There must be a breaking and entering
(B) There must be a dwelling house
(C) The offence must have been committed at night
(D) The arrestable offence must have been committed therein


--- page break ---

6. | Which of the following defines the meaning of the term “modus operandi”?
(A) The place of operation
(B) The way in which anything is done
(C) The onus of proof
(D) The method of facts presented
7. The standard of proof which the prosecution must achieve in a criminal trial to
convict an accused person is:
(A) Proof beyond the shadow of a doubt
(B) Proof on a balance of probability
(C) Proof beyond a reasonable doubt
(D) Proof required when the burden is reversed
8. | Which of the following is not a fundamental principle of “disclosure”?
(A) | A party must know the case he has to meet before the trial
(B) The prosecution has continuing duty to ensure full and frank disclosure
(C) The prosecution’s duty varies according to the stages of the trial
(D) All of the above
9. Inkeeping with the Administration of Justice (Indictable Proceedings) Act 2011
(AJIPA) which of the following documents is not required by a police officer,
when obtaining a “search warrant” from a Master of the High Court?
(A) Acomplaint upon oath
| (B) A complaint without oath
(C) A search warrant
(D)  Anaffidavit in support of the search warrant
10. Which of the following is not an ingredient of involuntary manslaughter?
(A) The actis unlawful and dangerous
(B) An act caused by recklessness as to the risk of death or serious bodily
harm
(C) An act to kill with malice aforethought
(D) Anact of gross negligence via a breach of duty
SECTION 1B - TRUE/FALSE - (1 mark each) Total 5 marks
Instructions: This Section has five (5) statements for you to label TRUE or FALSE.
Complete Section 1B by copying the statement number into your answer booklet and
write True/T OR False/F next to the number:


--- page break ---

1. The common law is derived from statute.

2. The offence of conspiracy is created when there is an agreement by two or more
persons to commit an unlawful act.

3. An inquest is an inquiry which must be heard before a judge and jury, into the
manner of death of a person who has died under suspicious circumstances.

4. Ajury for a capital matter in the high court shall comprise of nine (9) persons.

5. | Where a person accidentally sets fire to a room. Upon realizing what they had
done, went somewhere else and falls to sleep and omits to put out the fire. The
person would not be liable for an offence.

SECTION 1C - SHORT ANSWER QUESTIONS (2-4 marks each) Total 15 marks

Instructions: This Section 1C comprises five (5) short answer questions. Copy the

Section and the question number into your answer booklet and respond as necessary or

follow the individual question’s requirements.

1. __D parks his white motor vehicle in his garage and went to Tobago, he
returned 2 weeks later and discovered his vehicle painted red, yellow and
green. He was informed that his neighbor E repainted his motor vehicle.

What offence has been committed by E? Provide a reason for your
answer. (3 marks)
2. Define the term “wound”. (1 mark)
Which of the following defines a wound;
a) Where F strike’s G with the flat side of a cutlass on his forearm,
causing a swelling; (1 mark)
b) Where F hits G with a clenched fist to the mouth causing his lip to
b (1 mark)
urst.

3. Inaccordance with the Bail Act Chap. 4:20, Sec 12 (2), a Court may require
any person applying for bail to provide, as a condition for bail before his
release, a surety to secure his surrender to custody.

A Court may further require any person applying for bail to comply with
three (3) other conditions;
List the three (3) such conditions. (3 marks)

4. An accused person, raises the defense of “insanity” at his trial.

Outline clearly the requirements which must be proven by the accused
person in his defense, at the time of committing the act. (3 marks)
5. Define the term “common assault” . (3 marks)


--- page break ---

SECTION 2 - MINI CASE STUDY Total (40 marks)

Instructions: This Section comprises two (2) mini case study questions for 20 marks each.

Copy the Section and question number into your answer booklet and respond as

required.

1. Kand Barbie were childhood friends and attended the same secondary school. Barbie
received a scholarship to pursue Medicine in the United Kingdom. K attended the
University of the West Indies, St Augustine Campus, to pursue Electrical Electronic
Engineering. They both graduated in their respective fields of study, but lost touch with
each other.

Whilst browsing through a social media platform Barbie found K’s profile and they
began to communicate with each other. Barbie expressed her desire to visit Trinidad
and Tobago for a family reunion. Upon her arrival in Trinidad, they eventually met
and went out to lime on a few occasions. K decided to invite Barbie to his uncle’s house
in Cascade, since his uncle was out of the country and he was the caretaker, until his
return, and she accepted.
K cooked dinner and set a table for two with candles, wine and roses. After the meal,
they sat on the couch and while conversing, they began to undress each other. They
became sexually intimate. However, Barbie had a change of heart and began to feel
guilty. She protested and told K, “I don’t think I can do this, I have a husband at home”. She
pushed him away, but he became enraged and held her down on the couch with both
hands, and said “you know how long I want you.” K continued having sexual intercourse
with Barbie against her will. When he was finished, he told her to take a bath and get
dressed.
K then contacted his friend Rex, and told him to meet him at the house. A short while
later, Rex arrived at the house where he met K and Barbie. They both entered Rex’s car
and K instructed Rex to take them to the ATM in Maraval, which he did. Whilst in the
car, K put a knife to Barbie’s throat and demanded her credit and debit cards. Upon
reaching the ATM, K exited the car where he proceeded to use Barbie’s credit and debit
cards to withdraw a total of $15,500.00. K then returned to the car and handed the cards
to Barbie. He then told Rex to drop her off at the hotel, where she was staying. Barbie
subsequently made a report to the St Clair Police Station, from where she was taken to
seek medical attention.
You are the Sergeant in charge of the St. Clair, Police Station and Constable Dibbles was
detailed to conduct enquiries.
(A) (i) Discuss with Constable Dibbles, the offences for which K could be
charged. (4 marks)
(ii) With reference to the case, and application of the law and your
conclusion, provide an analysis showing the elements that would
establish the offences. (10 marks)
(B) (i) Advise Constable Dibbles whether Rex should be treated as an
accomplice.


--- page break ---

Give reasons for your answer. (2 marks)
(ii) Should Rex and K be jointly charged for the offences committed.
Give reasons for your answer. (4 marks)
2. Petal promised her son Jason that she would purchase a Play Station (P57) Game
Console for his birthday. She contacted her co-worker Rose who had told her
previously that Rose’s friend Torn usually travels to United States of America. He
would be able to purchase the item for at a cost of $8,000.00 TT.
Petal agreed and proceeded to the bank on Independence Square Port of Spain and
withdrew the cash. Petal made arrangements with Rose to meet Torn at their
workplace on Monday 6" May, 2024. After a brief conversation, Petal handed over an
envelope containing $8,000.00 TT to Torn. He prepared a receipt for the sum of money,
and handed it to her.
Torn subsequently purchased 2 return tickets to Tobago and booked the Penthouse
Suite for 2 at the Magdalena Grand Hotel, Tobago with the money given to him by
Petal. The next day, he boarded a Caribbean Airlines flight to Tobago, where he spent
the next 2 weeks at the hotel.
Torn subsequently sent photos of a PS7 to Petal’s phone and told her he would be
returning home soon. When Torn returned to Trinidad, he contacted Petal and told
her that the package is en-route to Trinidad from Miami. He also told her he would
have to clear it from the Port, since it was in a barrel with other items. However, six
weeks later, Petal had not heard from Torn. She called his cell phone on several
occasions but there was no answer. Petal went to the Belmont Police Station and made
a report.
As the Sergeant of the Belmont Police Station you have detailed Constable Drew to
investigate the complaint by Petal.
(A) (i) Discuss with Constable Drew, the offence for which Torn could be
charged. (4 marks)
(ii) With reference to the case, and application of the law and your
conclusion, provide an analysis showing the elements that would
establish the offence. (10 marks)
(B) Assist Constable Drew with the preparation of the Copy of Charge for
the Offence. (6 marks)
SECTION 3 - CONSTRAINED RESPONSE QUESTIONS Total (30 marks)
Instructions: This Section comprises four constrained response questions for 15 marks
each. You are required to answer ANY TWO of your choosing. Copy the Section and
question number into your answer booklet and respond as required.
1. (A) The Bail Act Chap 4:20, Sec. 9 states that, where a person is charged
with a criminal offence and requests bail, the court must give
reason/s for granting or denying bail.
Provide reason/s why the court would: -


--- page break ---

i) Grant bail to person
ii) Deny bail to person (7 marks)
(B) The Bail Act Chap. 4:60, Section 15 (3) states, a person who has been
released on bail in criminal proceedings may be arrested without
warrant by a police officer in certain circumstances.
Discuss the four (4) circumstances that may lead to a person being
arrested who was previously granted bail. (8 marks)
2. (A) Generally, hearsay evidence is inadmissible in court, define the
term “hearsay evidence”. (3 marks)
(B) Discuss four (4) exceptions to the “hearsay evidence rule”. (8 marks)
(C) The Evidence Act Chap 7:20, Section 15 (C) states that a statement
made by a person in a document in a criminal proceeding shall be
admissible as first hand “hearsay evidence” in certain instances.
State four (4) such instances. (4 marks)
3. (A) Under the Sexual Offences Act Chap: 11:28, Section 16 define the
term “serious indecency”. (3 marks)
(B) The Act of “serious indecency” does not apply to an act committed
in private between certain categories of persons.
State two (2) of those categories of persons. (4 marks)
(C) Section 31 (1) of the Sexual Offences Act, Chapter 11:28 as
amended, provides for the mandatory reporting of suspected abuse
ona child by eight (8) categories of persons.
State four (4) categories of such persons under the Act. (8 marks)
4. (A) The offence of “perjury” is created under the Perjury Act Chapter
11:14, Section 4.
Discuss the elements to prove the offence of “perjury”. (8 marks)
(B) Define the term “judicial proceedings” . (2 marks)
(C) State two (2) instances where a person would make a false
statement on oath, other than in a judicial proceeding. (5 marks)


--- page break ---

‘
a
