2022 POLICE PROMOTION (MAIN) EXAMINATION
TO THE RANK OF SERGEANT

SUBJECT ; POLICE DUTIES I
DATE : 5th NOVEMBER, 2022
TIME ALLOWED : 2 ¥2 HOURS
INSTRUCTIONS:
THIS PAPER HAS THREE (3) SECTIONS, CANDIDATES MUST ATTEMPT ALL
SECTIONS.
THE EXAMINATION IS WORTH 100 MARKS.
CANDIDATES ARE REQUIRED TO OBTAIN A MINIMUM OF 50% OF THE
POSSIBLE MARKS IN EACH SECTION.
IN A BLACK OR BLUE INK PEN, WRITE YOUR EXAMINATION NUMBER ON THE
COVER OF THE EXAMINATION ANSWER BOOKLET AND ON THE TOP OF
EVERY PAGE THROUGHOUT THE BOOKLET.
YOU ARE REMINDED OF THE NEED TO USE PROPER DICTION, CORRECT
SPELLING, STANDARD GRAMMAR AND AN ORDERLY, LEGIBLE AND NEAT
PRESENTATION OF YOUR WORK.
EACH SECTION MUST BEGIN ON A NEW PAGE.
DO NOT WRITE YOUR NAME, INITIALS OR REGIMENTAL NUMBER
ANYWHERE IN YOUR EXAMINATION ANSWER BOOKLET.
DO NOT IDENTIFY YOURSELF IN ANYWAY OTHER THAN YOUR
EXAMINATION CANDIDATE NUMBER.
NB:- QUESTIONS ANSWERED IN EXCESS WILL NOT BE CORRECTED.


--- page break ---

SECTION 1A - MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS (1 mark each) Total 10 marks
Instructions: This section consists of ten (10) multiple choice questions. Complete this
Section 1A by copying the question number into your answer booklet and write the
letter of your choice from the list of options.
1. Which of the following is incomplete accordance with the guideline provided in
Standing Order 40, as it relates to firearms and ammunition procedure?
(A) For Police Officers to stop and search vehicles for firearms and
ammunition.
(B) For Police Officers to follow in the refusal of a Firearm Users License to a
person involved in domestic violence.
(C) For Police Officers to deal with the seizure of firearms and ammunition.
(D) For Police Officers to obtain a warrant to search for firearms and
ammunition.
2. The following are all purposes of the Judges Rules, except to provide:
(A) the means whereby as far as possible, an offended person can obtain
redress for a grievance suffered.
(B) safeguards to the Police who act in accordance with the rules.
(C) standardized procedure in all forces and all courts.
(D) Protection of prisoners from improper action and ensuring that statements
are voluntarily given.
3. Which of the following is not correct?
(A) Standing Order 22 gives the Police Officer the authority to visit premises
to verify whether they are licensed to conduct business.
(B) Standing Order 52 lists a number of registers to be kept at Station for a
period of three years after the completion date.
(C) Standing Order 38 defines the possible instruction that will be received on
the completion of an investigation.
(D) Standing Order 26 illustrates the procedure to follow if it is not likely that
a person will be charged in relation to dangerous drugs that are seized by
a Police Officer.
4. Which of the following books must _be kept on Licensed Premises by a person
licensed to sell Spirits?
(A) Stock Book and Purchase Orders for Spirits Book.
(B) Liquor License Act Book and Certificate Book.
(C) Certificate Book and Stock Book.
(D) Purchase Orders for Spirits Book and Certificate Book.


--- page break ---

5. In accordance with Paragraph 4 of Standing Order 53 which one (1) of the
following is not correct?
(A) Ensuring that registers are checked and initialed daily.
(B) Submitting a weekly return of Domestic Violence Offences to the
Divisional Head.
(C) Ensuring that an investigator is detailed to investigate each report.
(D) Certifying that all reports of Domestic Violence have been investigated.
6. Which of the following is incomplete in accordance with Part 2 of Departmental
Order 254 dated 20/09/2006?
(A) Embracing the Philosophy of Policing for the People.
(B) Amendment of Standing Order 6 as it relates to Appearance and Turnout.
(C) Amendment of Standing Order 17 as it relates to Handing Over of the
Charge Room.
(D) Guidelines that govern the use of force by Police Officers.
7. In accordance with Standing Order 33 which one (1) of the following is not correct:
(A) Mental Health Officers include District Medical Officers.
(B) A Police Officer shall render assistance when required by a Mental Health
Officer.
(C) A Police Officer shall render assistance when called upon by a member of
the family, friend, legal guardian or relative of the mentally ill person;
(D) A Police Officer shall render assistance when a request is made by the
public.
8. In accordance with Standing Order 22 the following statements are correct except:-
(A) A Pool Room License authorizes the holder to use any premises in respect
of which the license is in force for the purpose of carrying out the business
of the Pool Room Operator.
(B) An Application for a license in relation to Pawnbrokers, Precious Metal
and Stones (Jewelry Shops) shall be made to the office of the Head of the
Division.
(C) A Registered Clubs refer to a community or society consisting of not less
than twenty-five (25) members.
(D) A Police Officer of the rank of Corporal is authorized to visit Pawnbrokers,
Precious Metal and Stones (Jewelry Shops) without written authority.


--- page break ---

9. In accordance with Standing Order 44 which of the following is not correct with
regards to an accident involving persons accorded immunities?
(A) It shall be investigated by a Police Officer of the rank of Corporal and
above.
(B) The investigator shall comply with all the instructions given with regard
to the investigation of a Road Traffic Accident.
(C) The investigator shall submit within twenty-four (24) hours the details of
the accident to the Assistant Commissioner “Mobile” and the Head of the
Division.
(D) The investigator shall submit the completed file to the Head of the Division
within seven (7) days of the accident.
10. In accordance with Regulation 150 of the Police Service Regulations 2007, the
following actions are considered falsehood or prevarication except:
(A) Knowingly makes or signs a false statement in an official document or
book.
(B) Willfully or negligently makes any false, misleading or inaccurate
statement.
(C) Causing the destruction or mutilation of any official document or record.
(D) Destroys or mutilates any official document or record without sufficient
cause.
SECTION 1B - TRUE/FALSE QUESTIONS (1 mark each) Total 10 marks
Instructions: This Section has ten (10) questions for you to label TRUE or FALSE.
Complete Section 1B by copying the question number into your answer booklet and
write True/T OR False/F next to the number:
1. The guidelines that should be observed when photographs are used to
identify suspected persons are in accordance with Standing Order 32.
2. The circumstances under which a Police Officer may record the fingerprint
impression of a person without consent are provided for under section 50 of
the Summary Offences Act Chapter 11:02.
3. Paragraph 7 of Standing Order 38 dictates the duties of the Second Division
Officer in charge of the Charge Room.
4. The Criminal Law Act Chapter 10:04 confers powers of arrest ona Fire Officer.
9. The procedure for destroying dangerous drugs is provided for in Standing
Order 38.
6. Standing Order 41 identifies the conditions under which an officer who was
issued with a personal firearm should return it to the Police Armory.
7. Community Policing, Embracing and Practicing the concept are presented in
Departmental Order 211/1996.


--- page break ---

8. The Trinidad and Tobago Police Service Strategic Plan 2019 -2021 aims to align
the organization with the trends and realities of Professional Development.

9. In accordance with Section 116 of the Summary Offences Act Chapter 11:02,
any Police Officer in uniform is authorized to call on the leader of a march to
disperse.

10. A permit is needed from the Head of the Division to lead or take part in any
public march within a Division.

SECTION 1C - SHORT ANSWER QUESTIONS (2 marks each) Total 10 marks

Instructions: This Section 1C comprises five (5) short answer questions. Copy the

Section and the question number into your answer booklet and respond as necessary or

follow the individual question’s requirements.

1. As a Second Division Officer in charge of a Station you received an
application for the issuance of a firearm by an officer for his personal
protection. In accordance with Paragraph 27 of Standing Order 41, state
the activities you should carry out to process the application. (2 marks)

2. _Inaccordance with Paragraph 32 of Standing Order 10, state the conditions
under which bail can be granted. (2 marks)

3. State the provision of Rule VI of the Judges Rules as it relates to the
interrogation of and confession statements made by the co-accused. (2 marks)

4, In accordance with Regulation 12 of the Police Service Regulations 2007,
state the principles that should be observed when supervising a ‘Police
Officer on Probation’ (2 marks)

9. In accordance with Section 3(1) of the Criminal Law Act Chapter 10:04,
define the term “ Arrestable Offence”. (2 marks)

SECTION 2 - MINI CASE STUDY Total (30 marks)

Instructions: This Section comprises two (2) mini case study questions for 15 marks
each. Copy the section and question number into your answer booklet and respond as
required.

1. Protest or Demonstration refers to the act of depositing on any roadway, street or
highway, any litter with intent to obstruct the lawful use of that road, street or
highway.

These activities have become more regular occurrences in recent times in Trinidad and
Tobago, as a result of the Government placing a six-month ban on the exporting of
scrap metal or iron from the country. On the morning of August 29, 2022, scrap
ironworkers blocked the northbound carriageway of the Sir Solomon Hochoy
Highway, triggering a massive traffic gridlock that was reminiscent of the March 23,
2015. day of total police day debacle.

Commuters trying to get out of South Trinidad on that morning were adversely
affected by the protest action. According to reports in the media, just after 5.00am that
morning, areas leading to the Northbound lanes of the Sir Solomon Hochoy Highway
were blocked by debris, bringing early morning traffic to a halt. Police and Fire
Officers visited the scene, attempting to clear the roadways, but several traffic delays
had been reported by those attempting to get out of South Trinidad.


--- page break ---

As the Sergeant in charge of a Police Station, you are required to lecture to your staff
about the duties and responsibilities of Police Officers whenever there is a report of a
Protest or Demonstration like the incident reported in the case study above. Your
lecture should embrace: -
(A) In accordance with Paragraph 5 of Standing Order 54 what is the

duties of a Senior Second Division Officer in charge of a station. (5 marks)
(B) In accordance with Paragraph 6 of Standing Order 54 what is the

importance of the Area officer on the scene of the protest or

demonstration. (5 marks)
(C) In accordance with Paragraph 7 of Standing Order 54 what is

the duties of an Officer at the scene of the protest or demonstration

as depicted in the case study above. (5 marks)

2. Within recent times there have been numerous reports of Domestic Violence

perpetrated against women in Trinidad and Tobago.
Some of these incidents resulted in the death of the victims and in most cases it was
alleged that previous reports were made to the Police but no action was taken. The
families of such victims have often argued that their loved ones would have been alive
if the Police had intervened.
Most recently in September 2022, a woman had been killed in what was reported to
be an act of domestic violence in Diego Martin Trinidad. According to the police
report the woman was found dead in bed with a wound to her head and the Police
believe she was struck on the head with a rock by her male companion.
A family member who agreed to speak to the media on condition of anonymity said
that the man was having work-related problems and began acting out at home. The
family member also said that several reports were made to the police but they never
responded. However, the police claimed that the information given by the family
relative was inaccurate, as on several occasions police officers were dispatched to the
home of the deceased after reports were made. However, they were unable to make
contact with the victim as no one responded to their calls. Further there was a large
pit bull tied to the front entrance of the building thereby preventing them from gaining
access to the premises.
Accordingly, Section 23 of the Domestic Violence Act Chapter 45:56 empowers Police
Officers to enter premises without a warrant in incidents of Domestic Violence.
Considering these perspectives objectively and based on your knowledge of Standing
Order 53 explain: -
(A) Based on the information in the case study above what actions

should a Senior Second Division Officer, to whom a report of

Domestic Violence is referred should take in accordance with

Paragraph 7 of Standing Order 53. (5 marks)
(B) Using the information in the case study above what are the duties

of the Second Division Officer appointed to investigate a report of

Domestic Violence in accordance with Paragraph 8 of Standing

Order 53. (5 marks)


--- page break ---

(C) _Ininstances of Domestic Violence what actions should be taken by
an Officer who enters premises without a warrant in accordance
with Paragraph 13 of Standing Order 53. (5 marks)

SECTION 3 - ESSAY QUESTIONS Total (40 marks)

Instructions: This Section comprises four (4) essay questions for 20 marks each. You are

required to answer any two (2). Copy the question number into your answer booklet and

respond in the format of an essay of no more than 250 words. (Note that marks will be
awarded as follows: - Content 18 marks, Use of English Language 2 marks).

1. In the most recent past in Trinidad and Tobago, the issue of Firearms Users License
to persons has created great consternation within the society. This has brought into
context the officers’ knowledge of Standing Order 40. Thus, based on the
requirements of this Standing Order, you are to lecture to the officers at the Station
capturing the following areas: -

(A) The Definition of “Firearms Users License” (2 marks)
(B) The duties of the investigator in processing a Firearms Users

License Application. (8 marks)
(C) The guidelines for the authorized officers collecting fees from a

Firearms Users License or certificate holder. (8 marks)

2 A man arrives at the station, claiming that he is a Bailiff and requests Police
assistance to execute a Court Order. As the Sergeant in charge of the Station and
based on the requirements of the Standing Order 46 and the Departmental Order
56 of 2020 explain the following to the officers under your command: -

(A) The term ‘Bailiff. (3 marks)
(B) The duties of the Second Division Officer in charge of the

Station when a Marshall or Bailiff requests assistance from the

Police Officer. (5 marks)
(C) The duties of the Police Officer who is detailed to assist a

Marshall or Bailiff. (5 marks)
(D) The principles of a Private Bailiff. (5 marks)

3. Care and Maintenances of Police Vehicles have been a major concern for the
Administrators of the Police Service. You are to discuss the Care and Maintenances
of Police Vehicles in accordance with the requirements of Standing Order 49, in
terms of the duties and responsibilities of the: -

(A) Police Sergeant in charge of a station pertaining to the care and
maintenance of the vehicles attached to that station. (5 marks)

(B) Police Drivers at your station. (8 marks)

(C) Officer in charge of the Administration Branch. (5 marks)


--- page break ---

4. You were given the task of lecturing to a group of Police Officers who are attached
to your station on the topic of “Recording Statement.” Based on the requirements
of Standing Order 32 explain: -

(A) Any five (5) areas of- “The Administrative Directions on
Interrogation and the Taking of Statements.” (15 marks)
(B) Types of statements that may be recorded by Police Officers. (3 marks)
