2022 POLICE PROMOTION (MAIN) EXAMINATION
TO THE RANK OF SERGEANT
SUBJECT : POLICE DUTIES II - INVESTIGATIONS,
EVIDENCE AND PROCEDURES
DATE : 5th NOVEMBER, 2022
TIME ALLOWED : 2%2 HOURS
INSTRUCTIONS:
THIS PAPER HAS THREE (3) SECTIONS, CANDIDATES MUST ATTEMPT ALL
SECTIONS.
THE EXAMINATION IS WORTH 100 MARKS.
CANDIDATES ARE REQUIRED TO OBTAIN A MINIMUM OF 50% OF THE
POSSIBLE MARKS IN EACH SECTION.
IN A BLACK OR BLUE INK PEN, WRITE YOUR EXAMINATION NUMBER ON THE
COVER OF THE EXAMINATION ANSWER BOOKLET AND ON THE TOP OF
EVERY PAGE THROUGHOUT THE BOOKLET.
YOU ARE REMINDED OF THE NEED TO USE PROPER DICTION, CORRECT
SPELLING, STANDARD GRAMMAR AND AN ORDERLY, LEGIBLE AND NEAT
PRESENTATION OF YOUR WORK.
EACH SECTION MUST BEGIN ON A NEW PAGE.
DO NOT WRITE YOUR NAME, INITIALS OR REGIMENTAL NUMBER
ANYWHERE IN YOUR EXAMINATION ANSWER BOOKLET.
DO NOT IDENTIFY YOURSELF IN ANYWAY OTHER THAN YOUR
EXAMINATION CANDIDATE NUMBER.
NB:- QUESTIONS ANSWERED IN EXCESS WILL NOT BE CORRECTED.


--- page break ---

SECTION 1A - MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS (1 mark each) Total 10 marks
Instructions: This section consists of ten (10) multiple choice questions. Complete this
Section 1A by copying the question number into your answer booklet and write the
letter of your choice from the list of options.

1. | Which of the following intentions is the ‘mens rea’ of larceny?

(A) Permanently deprive the owner of his property.

(B) __Dishonestly take property for personal gain.

(C) Permanently deprive the owner of his property for personal gain.
(D) Permanently deprive the owner of his property and dishonesty.

2. Which of the following is an accurate statement about a first instance warrant: -
(A) Must be in the possession of the officer making the arrest.

(B) | Must be executed by the police officer in whose name it was obtained.
(C) Need not be in the possession of the officer making the arrest.
(D) Needs to be backed before it is executed.

3. What period of time does the term ‘Night’ refer to under the Larceny Act Chap.

11:12:-

(A) 10:00pm to 6:00am
(B) 7:00pm to 5:00am
(C) 8:00am to 5:00 pm
(D) 8:00 pm to 6:00 am

4. | Whena police officer arrests a person, he must caution the person:-

(A) — Assoonas he places him in the cell at the police station.
(B) Immediately on arrest.

(C) Immediately upon arrival at the police station.

(D) Before he starts the interrogation process.

5. Asa police officer, when questioning people under the Praedial Larceny Act about
agricultural produce in their possession, and you are not satisfied that they are
telling the truth, you are authorized to:-

(A) Become firm and let the person know that you are not prepared to allow
them to continue with the lying.

(B) Arrest them and seize the produce and the vehicle that it is in.

(C) Place your hand on your sidearm so that they will know you mean
business and speak the truth.

(D) Seize the produce being conveyed and take the perishable produce to a


--- page break ---

charitable organization for distribution to the needy.

6. Pursuant to Section 8 of the Firearms Act, Chap. 16:01, which one (1) of the
following is not a prescribed public place set out in the Fourth Schedule of the
Firearms Regulations?

(A) The Senate.

(B) The Police Administration Building.
(C) |The House of Representatives.

(D) All courts of law.

7. Under which of the Judges Rules should a person be cautioned when informed that

he may be charged with an offence?
(A) Rulel.
(B) Rule 2.
(C)  Rule3.
(D)  Rules1 and 2.
8. | Which one (1) of the following phrases the Latin term ‘locus standi’ refers: -
(A) The right to be heard.
(B) Having the authorization to make rules of procedure.
(C) The stance taken by the court on the legal issue in a particular locality.
(D) Cases involving constitutional law only.
9. Under the rules of evidence, to what does the term ‘judicial notice’ refer?
(A) Notices sent out by the Judiciary regarding its operations.
(B) The various documents issued by the courts compelling a person’s
attendance before the judge or magistrate.
(C) ‘The review of a decision by the courts to determine whether a person
should be compensated.
(D) A well-known fact that is not susceptible to disproof.

10. Which one (1) of the following conditions for a person’s action explains the term

automatism?

(A) __Inastate of unconsciousness or impaired consciousness.

(B) Without the necessary actus reus.

(C) — His mind is acting imperfectly, but he is still able to control his limbs.
(D) _Inastate of complete awareness.


--- page break ---

SECTION 1B - TRUE/FALSE QUESTIONS (1 mark each) Total 5 marks
Instructions: This Section has five (5) questions for you to label TRUE or FALSE.
Complete Section 1B by copying the question number into your answer booklet and
write True/T OR False/F next to the number:
1. Regardless of the severity of the offence, all defendants have the right to trial
before a judge and jury.
2. Under the Larceny Act, Chap. 11:12 a person cannot be prosecuted for an offence
of obtaining services by false pretenses.
3. The fruit of the poisonous tree doctrine, mandates the exclusion of evidence
obtained from prior illegal means, except in cases involving the use of firearms.
4, When a licensed firearm holder is not carrying his/her firearm in public, he/she
must have his Firearm User’s License on his person.
5. | A person found in possession of more than 20 grams of heroin is deemed to have
the dangerous drug for the purpose of trafficking.
SECTION 1C - SHORT ANSWER QUESTIONS (2-4 marks each) Total 15 marks
Instructions: This Section 1C comprises five (5) short answer questions. Copy the
Section and the question number into your answer booklet and respond as necessary or
follow the individual question’s requirements.
1. Generally, the police have no authority to enter private premises without
a warrant. List four (4) exceptions to this general rule. (4 marks)
2. Section 3 (1) of the Dangerous Drugs Act, Chap. 11:25 lists a number of
ways in which an offence of drug trafficking or trafficking in dangerous
drugs may be committed. State any three (3) of them. (3 marks)
3. The definition of an offensive weapon at Section 2 of the Prevention of
Crime (Offensive Weapons) Act Chap. 11:09 identifies three means by
which an article may be deemed an offensive weapon.
Name the three (3) means and give a corresponding example foreach. _ (3 marks)
4. In accordance with the definition of ‘rape’ under the Sexual Offences Act,
Chap. 11:28, state with a brief reason, whether the offence of rape was
committed based on the facts in the following circumstance.
Abel and Barbie had sexual intercourse. Abel had promised to pay her
money for doing so, but he went back on his word and left without
paying. (3 marks)
5. During cross-examination at a Magistrate’s Court, the court may permit
leading questions to be asked. What is a ‘leading question’? (2 marks)


--- page break ---

SECTION 2 - MINI CASE STUDY Total (40 marks)

Instructions: This Section comprises two (2) mini case study questions for 20 marks

each. Copy the Section and question number into your answer booklet and respond

as required.

1. Brothers Able and Bolo are reputed gang members in their district. One day Able got
into an altercation with Doug which resulted in Doug stabbing Able to death. When
Bolo heard about his brother’s death, he vowed to take revenge. Doug was
apprehended by the police a few days later, and eventually charged with murder.
However, Doug’s attorneys were successful with their application to the High Court
to have him released on bail. One evening, Doug was sitting at a table at a local bar
having some refreshment with friends. Suddenly, Bolo and another gang member
Charlie, who were both armed with pistols entered the establishment. Erik, Frank
and other patrons present hid behind under tables, as the gunmen stood for a while
then approached Doug. They then pointed their firearms at Doug, and words were
exchanged before several shots were discharged and they walked away. As the
injured Doug cried out for help, the gunmen heard his cries and decided to return to
finish him off. At that point, Erik, who had an unlicensed firearm on him, took it out
and fatally shot Bolo and Charlie. Doug also succumbed to his wounds and died on
the scene. During your investigation into this matter, you also discovered that Frank
who is the holder of a licensed firearm, had actually seen Bolo and Charlie entering
the establishment with the firearms, and while he had sufficient time and opportunity
to take action before Doug had been shot, he decided to do nothing except hide and
look on.

As the investigator assigned to inquire into this incident, correctly discuss in full the
criminal liability of Erik and Frank based on the above. In your discussion, you
should state the issue or offence under consideration, the evidence/ingredients that
will be required for the matter under consideration, and the basis on which you arrive
at your conclusions.

(20 marks)

2. Polly is very superstitious by nature and hardly misses out on an opportunity to
acquire a good luck charm. While at home one day, she answered a knock on her door
and met Leary Tusty a travelling salesman offering items. Tusty began making his
pitch, but being a perceptive character, soon realized that Polly was of a superstitious
nature. He then lied and told her that he is a spiritual messenger and he assists persons
afflicted by evil forces. He added that he had already detected a bad spirit in the
house. Polly believed Tusty and invited him inside. He told her about his ability to
cure persons by special and confidential procedures. He convinced Polly that
someone had cast a sexual evil spirit upon her, and the only way to banish it was by
what he called ‘sexual purging’. Polly agreed to do whatever it took to rid her body
of the evil spirit. Unknown to Polly, her fifteen-year-old daughter Anna had been
eavesdropping on the entire conversation, and she noticed that over a two-week
period, Tusty had been paying regular visits to her mother, to purge the evil spirit by
way of sexual intercourse with her. Unknown to Polly, during that period Anna
became curious and had been asking Tusty about whether her mother was being
cured. They first started to communicate via text messaging, but soon began to meet
at an arranged location a few blocks away from Anna’s home. At these secret
meetings, Tusty would bring small gifts for Anna and pay compliments on her
beauty, but at no time did he attempt to interfere with her. The attention made Anna
feel special, and she developed a lot of confidence in Tusty, particularly as she felt
that her mother had not been showing enough interest in her, and her activities. At
one of their secret meetings, Tusty told Anna that he had detected on her a spirit
similar to the one on her mother, but it was in the early stages of possessing her. He
added that he wanted to take care of it quickly, but wanted to make sure that she was


--- page break ---

ready. Although she did not believe him, they both agreed that her mother did not
need to know. Anna was excited to experience the sexual purging at Tusty’s home
from the next afternoon. However, later that said night Polly saw a text message from
Tusty pop-up on Anna’s mobile phone. This made her suspicious causing her to
confide in her sister, who demanded that the police be alerted. The following
afternoon when Anna and Tusty met at their agreed location, the police intercepted
them and took Tusty into custody. Tusty is claiming that he did not break any law
since he never had sex with Anna or interfere with her in any way. He is also refuting
Polly’s allegations against him about their relations, on the basis that they were
consenting adults.
The above facts were revealed during your investigation of this matter. Discuss in
detail, whether Tusty can be prosecuted for any offence/s. In your answer, you
should state the offence/s that you will have under consideration, along with the
applicable laws and the related evidence from the given facts, that will support your
answer.
(20 marks)
SECTION 3 - CONSTRAINED RESPONSE QUESTIONS Total (30 marks)
Instructions: This Section comprises four constrained response questions for 15 marks
each. You are required to answer ANY TWO of your choosing. Copy the Section and
question number into your answer booklet and respond as required.
1. (A) Where admissibility of evidence at court embraces what is known
as the ‘Best Evidence Rule’. Name the five (5) circumstances under
which secondary evidence may be admitted. (10 marks)
(B) The rule against the admissibility hearsay evidence is stated as
follows: “A statement made by a person not called as a witness, which is
offered in evidence to prove the truth of the fact contained in the statement,
is hearsay and it is not admissible”
List five (5) exceptions to this general rule. (5 marks)
2. (A) State the four (4) powers of arrest under Section 3(2-5) of the
Criminal Law Act, Ch. 10:04. (10 marks)
(B) Asa part of the procedure in effecting an arrest, a police officer is
required to do certain things with respect to the arrested person so
as not to violate the person’s rights, while ensuring the safety of
both the arrestee and the police.
List any five (5) of the procedural requirements in effecting an
arrest. (5 marks)
3. (A) Section 9 of the Firearms Act, Chapter 16:01 (the “Act”) creates
offence in relation to the selling or transferring of a firearm. Section
5(1) provides an interpretation of the term ‘transfer’, to include
various means.
List any three (3) of these means. (3 marks)
(B) Section 6(2) of the Act lists six (6) categories of persons who may


--- page break ---

have a prohibited weapon in their possession without a permit

when acting in their various capacities. List them. (6 marks)
(C) One day, a detective under your supervision approached you and

sought your guidance on a matter under his review. He explained

that during a recent exercise, a firearm and fifteen rounds of

ammunition was discovered in a house. When questioned, the

householder explained that the items belonged to his deceased

cousin, and that he had been keeping them in his possession for

about two and a half weeks, since he was the executor of his

deceased cousin’s estate. The detective added that his investigation

has since confirmed the account given by the householder.

However, his review of the records has also revealed that the

householder had been declared a restricted person under the

Firearms Act, and he believes that the householder should have

surrendered the firearm and ammunition to the police immediately

on his coming into possession of it.

Explain the guidance that you will give to the detective regarding

the liability of the householder. (6 marks)

4. (A) To prove the offence of larceny, certain ingredients are necessary.

List the eight (8) essential ingredients to prove the offence of

larceny. (8 marks)
(B) Under Section 3(b) of the Larceny Act Ch. 11:12 the expression takes

includes obtaining possession by either of four means.

List the four (4) means. (4 marks)
(C) List three (3) fraud offences under the Larceny Act Ch. 11:12. (3 marks)
