2013 POLICE PROMOTION (MAIN) EXAMINATION 
'TO THE RANK OF SERGEANT 
DATE 29TH JUNE, 2013 
SUBJECT LAW 
TIME 2 ~HOURS 
INSTRUCTIONS: 
THIS PAPER CONTAINS FOURTEEN (14) QUESTIONS, CANDIDATES ARE 
REQUIRED TO ANSWER ANY TEN (10) QUESTIONS . 
NB. QUESTIONS k~SWERED IN EXCESS OF TEN WILL NOT BE ASSESSED 
THIS EXAMINATION IS WORTH 100 MARKS. 
THE PASS MARK lS SOtYo. 
YOU ARE REMINDED OF THE NEED TO USE PROP ER DICTION, CORRECT 
SPELLING, STANDARD GRAMMAR AND AN ORDERLY, LEGffiLE AND NEAT 
PRESENTATION OF YOUR WORK . 
• WRITE YOUR EXAMINAT ION NUMBER ON THE COVER OF THE 
EXAMINATI ON BOOKLET AND AT THE TOP OF EVERY PAGE THROUGHOUT 
TH}b BOOKLET. 
DO NOT WRITE YOUR NAME AND REGIMENTAL NUMBER IN RESPONSE 
TO ANY QUESTIONS 



I. Explain any fou..!:._ill of the followi ng terms under the Firea rms Act Chapter 16:0 1: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Controlled Delivery 
Competent Authority 
Fire~rm Users Licence 
Firearm Dealers Lice nce 
Pub lic place 
(10 marks ) 
2. To const itute st 'aling there must be a taking of the property of another and such taking may be either 
'actual' or 'constructive'. 
3. 
4. 
... 
/ 
5. 
(a) Expla in any two of the follow ing forms of taking: 
• Trick; 
• Mistake; 
• Finding 
(6 marks) 
(b) Name four (4) offences for which the prosecution need not addu ce evidence of the 'mens rea' 
of the defendant at his trial. 
(a) Section 6 (I) (a) of the Domestic Violence Act a 'Protection Order' may prohibit 
a respondent from engagin g in seven types of conduct. 
Name trese types of cond uct. 
(4 marks) 
(8 marks ) 
(b) Section 27 ( 1) of the Act provides that where the Court is required to determine whether to 
grant bail in respect of an offence under the Act, the CoUI1 sha ll consid er certai n fact ors . 
a) 
(a) 
Name any two of these factors that the court must consider unde r Section 27 (1 ). 
(2 mar·ks) 
Define _!toy four of the following terms under the Praedial Larceny Act Chapte r 10:03 as 
amended: 
• 
• 
Merpora ndum of sale or delivery 
Producer 
• Wholesaler 
• 
• 
Retailer 
Pur yhaser 
(10 marks ) 
State the ingredients necessary to establish the offence of kidnapping at common law 
(5 marks) 
(b) Explain the difference, if any, between the offences of kidnapping and false 
imprisonment. 
(5 marks ) 
6. State whether the activity described in each of the following statements is criminal or unethical. 
a) Refusing to rem ove a veh icle off someone's foot after acci dentall y driving on it. 
b) A police officer employed a deceptive strategy in order to get a confession from a suspect. 
2 



7. 
c) A policeman accepts a token from a motorist then allows him to park illegally for a short 
while. 
d) A man incited his large dog to put another person's sma ller dog in bodily fear just for a laugh. 
e) A police officer witnessed a colleague chea ting at an examination but failed to repo11 the act 
of dishonesty observed. 
f) Lying to someone to convince the person to lend you a sum of money that you urgently need. 
g) Writing out a cheque to pay for goods purchased, then stopping payment on the cheque before 
the person had chance to negotiate it. 
h) Painting pictu res on currency notes 111 order to sel l them at a h igher value than their 
denomination because of the artwork. 
i) An O.ympic swimmer looks on and does nothing to save a young child from drowning in a 
swimming pool. 
j) Agreeing to accept a monetary reward as compensation for standing as a surety to secure bail 
for a person in custody. 
(a) Define the terrn 'i ndictable offence'. 
(b) State the means by wh ich a person may be brought before the court to answer to a 
case 
(c) Generally the police have no authority to enter private premises without a warrant. 
List four (12 exceptions to this general rule. 
(10 marl<.s) 
(3 ma r ks) 
criminal 
(3 marks ) 
(4 mark s) 
8. D who had been in and out of prison for a number of theft offences over the past few years, decided 
that it was time that he depart from that type of life. However, he believed that police officers always 
needed something to keep them vigilant, so he started to coach a few of the younger men of the area 
in 'the fme art of pick pocketing'. D would run simulations in an open yard at the back of his home, in 
which he schfoled the young men how to relieve items from the person of individuals, through brief 
but seemingly accidenta l contact w ith the intended vict im. One day D's sister was the victim of a 
purse snatching and in giving a statement to the police; she told the officers about the activities that 
.;. her brother cc::.rries on at the back of his compound. Later that afternoon, a party of officers conducted . 
/ 
a surveillance exercise based on the information rece ived from D 's sister, and observed D performing 
the acts as described by his sister. 
For what offence, if any, can D be prosecu ted in relation to the above facts? Discuss fully stating the 
applicab le law with the appropriate analysis in your answe r. 
(1 0 marl<s) 
9. Two days ago, a man visited a police station and reported that a large quantity of hair products to the 
value of $63,000.00 had been stolen from his business place. The man added that whilst he is not the 
only businessman that traded in such products, he had made certain adjustments to the appearance of 
the products and would be able to recognize his items if he should see them. Last night the man 
returned to the police station and stated that he had received information on the locat ion at which the 
stolen items yvere being stored . After an initial investigation into the veracity of the information, the 
pol ice obtained a warrant to sea rch the prem ises in quest ion. On their arrival at the location, the police 
office rs met the propr ieto r on site and he expla ined that he had been keeping the place under 
survei !lance unti I they arrived. Moments later, the police officers entered the premises and 
commenced a search exercise . However, they soon realized that there were a number of hair product 
items on the compound and they were unable to distinguish the items that had been reported stolen. 
3 



10. 
11. 
The supervising o fict then remembered that the proprietor was also present and instructed an officer 
to escort him insi e the premises. On hearing this, the owner of the premises objected and said that he 
knew the proprier:r and that he did not want him to enter his home. The supervising officer then 
reminded the ow er of the premises that it was a police exercise and that the proprietor's presence 
was to assist the olice. Despite the protests of the owner of the premises, the proprietor was able to 
assist the officer1s·n their search and he identjfied several boxes of products as the stolen property. 
The owner of the remises is now upset at the manner in which the police conducted the exercise and 
he has made a co plaint to the head of the police division. 
Discuss in detail hether the action taken by the police during the exercise was lawful. 
(10 marks) 
One afternoon a p~1iy of police officers was on foot patrol in an area designated as a crime 'hot spot', 
when they had cause to respond to a report of domestic violence. On arrival at the house in question, 
the officers were greeted by gunfire but quickly got the matter under control. Two days later whilst on 
patrol in the said trea, the officers noticed that a large crowd had been gathered at about one hundred 
and fifty meters f om their location. They went to investigate, and as they approached a woman was 
heard saying 'Th nk God the police reach. Ah fed up of this senseless shooting. ' Upon asking 
questions the offi~ers learnt that a heated argument had been going on between a young man, who 
was still in the cr wd, and another man who had accused him of being a police informer. The officers 
heard that the stra ger left vowing to return unexpectedly and shoot anyone that gets in his way. The 
officers took information fi:om persons who were willing to speak with them, told the young man to 
be careful. They Jsked the crowd to disperse and turned to walk away. As they were walking away, 
two loud explosiors spunded off from a direction behind the officers. One officer instinctively turned 
and fired a shot ip th{; direction from which the explosions were heard. Unf01iunately, the officer's 
bullet came into ~ontact with one of the residents with fatal results. It was later discovered that the 
two explosions inlquestion, came from a car that had backfired whilst undergoing electrical repairs. 
Discuss fully whether the officer that fired the fatal shot can be prosecuted for any criminal offence. 
You are to state t1e applicable law with the appropriate analysis in your answer. 
(10 marks) 
A woman and hettwelve year old son are quite well known in the area in which they live. The boy is 
known to be ver mischievous and inquisitive, and complaints to his mother are always met with 
hostility. Residen s generally avoid confrontations with the woman, and quite often accept insults and 
foul language fro the boy rather than face the wrath of his mother. One day the woman sent her son 
to the neighbou1ood mini mart to purchase a packet of cigarettes for her. Knowing that the boy is 
always up to so mischief, the proprietor initially refused to sell the item to him stating that he was 
not selling any · garettes to any little boy. However, when the boy threatened to return with his 
mother the proprietor decided to give the boy a pouch of tobacco and a roll of wrapping paper, and 
told him that his F.other would have to roll them out herself, and that she was getting a discount on 
the cost. He gave lthe boy the items and sent him on his way. However, as a precaution, the proprietor 
asked his assistant to follow the boy to ensure that he goes straight to his home. 
Discuss fully thelappropriateness ofthe action taken by the proprietor. You are to state the applicable 
law with correspqnding analysis in your answer . 
(10 marks) 
12. A thi1ty year old an who had several pending matters before the comts for fraud offences, had been 
making efforts to ignite a relationshlp with a twenty five year old woman in a nearby district. About 
two months ago t ey both exchanged telephone numbers and e-mail addresses and they started to chat 
with each other. Iowever, she soon found out about his criminal tendencies and she told him that as a 
young professio al w~man, she is not interested in associating with anyone that leads a criminal 
lifestyle. She del ted his e-mail address from her list of contacts and deleted all messages received 
from him. Howe er, he kept calling her on the telephone at nights begging her to give him a chance. 
The young worn n visited your station and complained that despite her pleas for him to desist calling 
her, he called her on three occasions within the past four days and had been making uncomplimentary 
remarks about he character. She has become totally distressed and requested police intervention. You 
overheard the se try at the desk comment to the woman that it sounded like a situation in which the 
fox could not ge the grapes, so he said that it was sour . The sentry then told the woman that her 
report is of a d mestic nature, and advised her to consider changing her telephone number and 
creating a new e- ail address. 
4 



State with reatons 1 whether you agree with the advic e administered by the sentry. You are to state the 
applicable law with the appropriate analysis in your answer. 
(10 marks ) 
13. While driving to his home one night, D the son of an ambassado r, was stopped at a road block. Afte r 
displaying his credenti~ls and driving documents, he was asked to take a breathalyzer test. The result 
showed that he was above the lawful limit and he was invited to the mobile unit for the second test to 
be administered. D obliged but explained to the officers that in his native county the limit is a bit 
higher and under the laws of his country, he would not be considered to be driving under the 
influence of alcohol. D used the internet on his mob ile device to find a web page with the relevant 
law from his riative country which he showed to the officers. Despite reading the content of the law 
from D's country, the officers administered the second test and the result confirmed that his blood ­
alcohol level was abov<! the permitted level, according to the provisions of the Motor Vehicle and 
Road Traffic Act as am€nded. 
Discuss fu lly thetber D can be prosecuted for any criminal offence based on the above stated facts . 
(10 marks) 
14. A twenty one year old n\an who used his private veh icle for hire on the days he was not required for 
his regular job1 had alw! ys been calling out to school girls and blow ing kisses in their direction. One 
afternoon whil~ driving along a side street a sixteen year old schoolgirl stopped him and asked for a 
lift. As they embarked on their journey, she engaged him in a casual conversation and complimented 
him on his physical feahtres and his handsome face. In return, he praised her on her beauty and asked 
whether she had a boyfr iend. She replied that he could be her man and he could start to take care of 
things immediately by ~iving her $300.00. The rem ark took him by surprise and he told her that it 
was better that he just d10pped her off at her destina tion. She then pulled open her blouse by ripping 
off the top button, and iJ a demanding tone of voice told him that if she did not get what she wanted, 
she would claim that he attempted to rape her. He quickly agreed to give her the money and in return 
she said that she v. anted to have sex with him so that he would remember her for the next time. 
Without consicering th ~ possible consequences, he drove to a secluded area where he had sexual 
intercou rse with her in tlhe back seat of his car . When they were fin ished, she told him that he should 
I 
not worry as he had her consent, and that once he treated her 'right' she would not cry rape on him. 
However, unknown to t1e both of them, someone who knew the girl was a witness to the sexual 
encounter and a report was made to the police. 
State whether the man can be prosecuted for any criminal offence based on the above stated facts . 
Discuss fully stating the 'applicable Jaw with approp riate analys is in your answer. 
(10 marks) 
END 
5 
. - . 