i eee
2012 POLICE PROMOTION (MAIN) EXAMINATION
TO THE RANK OF SERGEANT
DATE : 11" AUGUST, 2012
SUBJECT LAW
TIME : 2 % HOURS
ee
INSTRUCTIONS:
THIS PAPER CONTAINS FOURTEEN (14) QUESTIONS. CANDIDATES
ARE REQUIRED TO ANSWER ANY TEN (10) QUESTIONS WHICH
CARRY TEN (10) MARKS EACH.
NB:- QUESTIONS ANSWERED IN EXCESS OF TEN WILL NOT BE ASSESSED.
THIS EXAMINATION IS WORTH 100 MARKS.
THE PASS MARK IS 50%.
YOU ARE REMINDED OF THE NEED TO USE PROPER
, DICTION, CORRECT SPELLING, STANDARD GRAMMAR AND AN
¢ ORDERLY, LEGIBLE AND NEAT PRESENTATION OF YOUR WORK.
» WRITE YOUR EXAMINATION NUMBER ON THE COVER
OF THE EXAMINATION BOOKLET AND THE TOP OF EVERY
PAGE THROUGHOUT THE BOOKLET.
DO NOT WRITE YOUR NAME AND REGIMENTAL
NUMBER IN REPSONSE TO ANY QUESTION.


--- page break ---

. 1. (a) Define the term ‘Brothel’ in accordance with the Sexual Offences Act, Chapter
11:28. (“the Act”).
; — ; (2 marks)
(b) In accordance with Section 23 (3) of the Act, state what factors are essential in a
court of law to establish the offence of ‘Living on the earnings of prostitution’.
| (8 marks)
2. (a) State what is meant by the term ‘judicial notice’ and list two (2) examples of it.
, (4 marks)
(b) A police officer while giving evidence upon oath said that he heard Candace
shouting to J ohn saying “John, boy your shop on fire and you leaving.”
Candace was never found, to get a statement from her.
Discuss whether the evidence should or should not be admitted at the trial.
(6 marks)
3. (a) A, B and C are jointly charged with an offence. A wants to give evidence for the
prosecution.
|
State the a e (3) alternative conditions that must exist before A could be allowed
to give evidence for the prosecution.
(6 marks)
(b) Define the following legal terms :
(i) onus pelea
(ii) chattel
(4 marks)
4. (a) Define the term “Restricted Person’ under the Firearms Act, Chapter 16:01.
(6 marks)
(b) In accordance with Section 7 (1) of the Firearms Act, Chapter 16:01 (“the Act”),
name four 4) categories of persons that are exempted from the provisions of
Section 6 (1) of the Act that relate to possession of a firearm or ammunition.
(4 marks)
5. (a) State four (4 ) defences applicable to the offence of assault.
- (4 marks)
}
(b) Explain the two (2) grounds upon which a ‘no case submission’ may be upheld in a
court of law.
/ (6 marks)
6. (a) Whilst on patrol duty one day a police constable who had recently graduated from
the Police Academy had cause to respond to a domestic squabble between a man
and his girlfriend. Base on accusations made by the young woman, the constable
searched the pockets of the man's trousers and found a bag containing thirty grams
of marijuara. The constable arrested the man and took him to the station. The
constable has reported the occurrence to you and asks for your assistance to draft
the appropyate charge in relation to the matter.
Write out the words to the copy of charge under the Dangerous Drugs Act, Chapter
11:25 applicable to the given facts.
(7 marks)
(b) Would the biecdision to charge the man be any different if the man had produced a
prescription signed by his herbalist that covered the amount of the dangerous drugs
found on him?
(3 marks)
| 2
|


--- page break ---

% (a) Section 3] (1) of the Sexual Offences Act, Chapter 11:28 provides for the
mandatory reporting of suspected abuse on minors by four (4) categories of
persons.

Name thein.
(8 marks)
(b) Define the term ‘minor’ under the Sexual Offences Act, Chapter 11:28.
(2 marks)

8. A group of young men and women had become engrossed in viewing live video
feeds of gach other over the internet, via miniature cameras mounted inside their
apartments and tuned to their personal computers. They would frequently pose
physical challenges to each other to achieve what they called their ‘adrenalin rush’.
One day in answer to a challenge, a young woman engaged in sexual activity with
another member of the group against the protests of her fiancé who was viewing
from his gpartment and begging her to stop. The next day the young man met with
his girlfriend and told her that she had no idea how much he was in love with her.
He added) that he would even give his life for her if it came to it, to which she
laughed and said ‘Yea right, that’s original. I have to see proof of that to believe it”
and she walked away. Later that evening when the group members tuned in to their
live video feed, they saw the young man on their screens holding a firearm to his
head. He explained that what they were seeing was not his choice as he had high

- hopes for his girlfriend and himself, but that she was the one who forced him to do
what they were about to see. The group members then witnessed when the young
man discharged the firearm fatally shooting himself in his head. The young man’s
parents are now calling for justice advocating that the young lady should be
prosecuted for the offence of incitement.

Discuss fully whether the young woman’s liability for the death of the young man
stating the applicable law with appropriate analysis in your answer.
(10 marks)

9. A man who had recently started working at a funeral parlour had been boasting to
his friends that he had one of the most interesting jobs in the world. He would
usually make cat-calls at young women and tell them that one day they would end
up in front of him as nude as a newborn baby. One night while attending to the
corpse of 2a female at the funeral parlour, he gazed upon her face and recognized her
as someone that he had seen before. He recalled that he had a strong desire to be
intimate with her and started to become aroused at the sight of her nude body. He

then uttered the following words “Well, ifyou have no objection I'll satisfy you one
‘ more time.” He then climbed upon her and started to have intercourse. However,
one of thé co-workers who had returned to collect an item saw what was taking
place. He} telephoned the police and asked them to visit the premises quickly as
ra there was a rape in progress. t .
What are the chances of the man being convicted for the offence of rape?
Discuss fully stating the applicable law with appropriate analysis in your answer.
(10 marks)

10. V received an e-mail that he won the sum of £21M in an Australian Lotto. The
e-mail advised that he was required to pay legal and processing fees totaling
US$25,000.00 to a designated account and that the funds would be disbursed in
three equal tranches. V immediately visited the bank where he caused the requested
funds to be debited from his account and wire transferred as directed. He then went
to a shopping mall where he ordered several new model household electronic
appliances and arranged for delivery to his home the following day. Later that
afternoon|V placed his large screen television set, stereo equipment and other
household appliances on the pavement outside his home to be picked up by the

:


--- page break ---

trash collectors. Around 10:00pm that night, V telephoned his attorney to share the
news of his regent 'good fortune’ and instructed his attorney to start searching for a
suitable property to fit his new status. It was at that stage the attorney told V that
he may have been the victim of an internet hoax and that he should be cautious
about prematute expenditure. Later that night as V lay in bed, he reflected on the
advice from attorney and went outside to retrieve his appliances. As opened his
outer gate he abserved a man about one block away leaving with his television set.
V ran inside hjs house and reported that the man had stolen his property. The man
was held some} distance away with the television set.
For what offence, if any, can the man be prosecuted?
Discuss fully stating the applicable law with appropriate analysis in your answer.
(10 marks)
11. One morning,| a contingent of police officers carried out an exercise in an area
searching for three suspects who were wanted in connection with a series of violent
robberies and/ firearm related offences. After the police vacated the area, the
relatives of one of the suspects called a television host that she knew and invited
him to visit her home with his crew for the purpose of televising the condition of
her house after a police search. While the interview was being televised, one of the
wanted men entered the house through a rear door. However, a neighbour had seen
his arrival and alerted the police. By the time the police arrived the wanted man
was being interviewed by the television host complaining that he was being set up
by a certain group of police officers. On arrival at the premises the police officers
attempted to enter the house in order to arrest the suspect, but the host caused his
bodyguards tq block them saying that they would have to wait until he finished his
interview as what he was doing was of public importance. As the team of police
officers forced their way into the house to arrest the suspect, the television host
wedged himself between the officers and the suspect and advised the officers that
there was no| need to get rough as there was no place for the man to run. The
officers shifted the television host aside and apprehended the suspect. As they were
leaving the premises, the television host made a disparaging remark about their
style of twenty first century policing and stated that the public was watching them.
A senior officer in the police party instructed two of his officers to arrest the
television host.
What offence, if any, did the television host commit?
Discuss fully stating the applicable law with appropriate analysis in your answer.
= (10 marks)
12.
Small-man who is a pre-schooler has been causing his mother a lot of
s embarrassment due to complaints by the teachers that he is always up to some
mischief. One day during the lunch break at school a teacher observed that Small-
man was distributing to his classmates items which appeared to be rolled pieces of
paper. As the teacher walked over to the area, Small-man closed his lunch kit,
looked up at his teacher and smiled. On checking inside the lunch kit the teacher
found several hand rolled marijuana cigarettes weighing 300 grams contained
inside. The police were subsequently summoned.
For what offence, if any, can Small-man be charged?
Discuss fully stating the applicable law with appropriate analysis in your answer.
(10 marks)
13. A occupied an aisle seat in a crowded bus while travelling to his home one
evening. At the next stop B and his girlfriend C entered the bus. While making
their way to the back of the bus B stepped on A’s foot causing him severe pain. A
then exclaimed in a loud tone of voice ‘You idiot! Why don’t you look where you
are going? | This sudden outburst caught B by surprise, and he lost grip of his brief
4


--- page break ---

bag which fell onto A’s lap. A took hold of the brief bag and hurled it towards B,
but B shifted and the bag came into contact with C’s face. On seeing this, B
decided that he had to defend his girlfriend’s honour and he slapped A across his
face causing a reddening of A’s face.
‘Discuss {the liability of A and B under the criminal law stating the applicable
offences, if any, with appropriate reasoning in your answer.
(10 marks)
14, One day A single mother who had to keep an appointment asked her cousin to look
after her jseven year old daughter. The cousin was a young adult whom the child
affectionately called uncle. Whilst listening to the news on the radio the child heard
the news¢aster use the word ‘interfere’ and asked her ‘uncle’ to explain what the
word meant as she had always been hearing it on the television. He then proceeded
to tell her that it meant that she should do things with strangers to make them feel
hice. The} girl looked puzzled and said that she still did not understand. The young
man then told her that if she was willing, he would show her what he meant and
that should make her understand. The girl said that she was willing to do whatever
it took to} understand. He then unzipped his pants and inserted his private part into
her mouth. Moments later he removed his private part from her mouth and
proceeded to explain that she should not let any stranger do that to her as it would
make them feel good and that is what is meant by interfering. The girl said that she
understodd and they spent the rest of the afternoon viewing television until her
mother r ed home. Later that night the girl boasted to her mother that she knew
. what the word interfere meant and proceeded to explain what ‘uncle’ had shown to j
her. After discussing it with her other relatives the mother visited your station and
seeks advice on whether the particular facts of the incident was a criminal offence.
Discuss fully whether any criminal offence was committed stating the applicable
law with appropriate analysis in your answer.
(10 marks)
END
yi
|
5
