ee ae
a swe
2020 POLICE PROMOTION (MAIN) EXAMINATION
TO THE RANK OF CORPORAL
* SUBJECT ; LAW
DATE : 22nd AUGUST, 2020
TIME ALLOWED : 2% HOURS
2 ne
INSTRUCTIONS:
THIS PAPER CONTAINS FOURTEEN (14) QUESTIONS. CANDIDATES ARE
REQUIRED TO ANSWER ANY TEN (10) QUESTIONS EACH OF WHICH WILL
CARRY TEN (10) MARKS.
NB:-_ QUESTIONS ANSWERED _IN_ EXCESS _ OF TEN WILL NOT BE
CORRECTED.
THE EXAMINATION IS WORTH 100 MARKS.
THE PASS MARK IS 50%
YOU ARE REMINDED OF THE NEED TO USE PROPER DICTION, CORRECT
SPELLING, STANDARD GRAMMAR AND AN ORDERLY, LEGIBLE AND NEAT
PRESENTATION OF YOUR WORK.
WRITE YOUR EXAMINATION NUMBER ON THE COVER OF THE
EXAMINATION ANSWER BOOKLET AND ON THE TOP OF EVERY PAGE
THROUGHOUT THE BOOKLET.
| | DO NOT WRITE YOUR NAME _ AND REGIMENTAL_NUMBER_IN
RESPONSE TO ANY QUESTION
|


--- page break ---

SECTION A
1. One morning in late March, 2020, Diston Sing was standing in a line
outside a pharmacy awaiting his turn to enter. Sing heard someone
sneeze and felt a light breeze against his back. He immediately turned
around and saw Ivor Cole standing approximately eighteen inches
behind him. He then drew Cole’s attention to a sign posted outside the
pharmacy, which directed persons to stand at least four to six feet apart,
as a preventive measure to reduce the spread of an infectious disease.
Cole refused to step back, and within moments and argument erupted
between them. Sing suddenly shoved Cole in his chest pushing him
backwards, while telling him to keep his distance. Cole immediately
left the scene and went to the police station, where he lodged a
complaint against Sing. After an investigation into the complaint, a
decision was taken to prosecute Diston Sing for an offence under the
Summary Offences Act, Chapter 11:02.
(a) Based on the given facts, write out the appropriate particulars of
the copy of charge for which Diston Sing should be prosecuted.
NB: The specific statutory reference is not required. (7 marks)
(b) State with a brief reason whether the charge against Sing for the
specific offence would have been any different, if his hands did
not come contact with Cole’s chest, because he had stepped
backwards at the material time. (3 marks)
2. A motorist charged with certain offences under the Fixed Penalty and
Demerit Points system, under the Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic
Amendment Act, 2017 Chapter 48:50 of the laws of Trinidad and
Tobago will be liable to receive demerit points of three (3) or above for
certain violations. ;
List any ten (10) of these violations. (10 marks)
3. (a) List seven (7) of the main ingredients that are necessary to prove
the offence of larceny. (7 marks)
(b) Name three (3) specific offences that may be committed by a
| person employed in the capacity of a clerk or servant. (3 marks)
4. (a) Define the term ‘wound’ under the criminal law. (4 marks)
| (b) State whether wounds were inflicted in the following
circumstances. Give reasons for your answers:
|
| (i) Jane became angry with Bill, when she realized that he had
| eaten the entire bowl of ice cream. She reached for her pellet
| gun and shot at him. The pellet hit Bill on his cheekbone,
} which instantly became red and swollen. (3 marks)
| (ii) Mani and Pebbles were arguing over their division of stolen
mangoes. Mani lost his temper and hurled a stone at Pebbles.
The stone hit Pebbles on his left eye, causing him to suffer


--- page break ---

|
scratches and a bloodshot eye. (3 marks) |
5. State the statutory time limit for instituting proceedings for each of the (1 mark
following offences: each)
(a) Pretending or professing to tell fortunes
(b) Dangerous driving
(c) Obtaining property valued $25,000.00 by use of a dishonored
cheque.
(d) Assault by beating committed by a masked person
(e) Larceny of a postal packet in the course of transmission.
(f) Inciting a vicious dog to put someone in fear of bodily harm
(g) Receiving a valuable security in the sum of $1,500.00
(h) Robbery of an article valued $280.00
(i) Wearing the uniform of a member of the Trinidad and Tobago,
Defense Force without the requisite permission.
(j) | Corruptly receiving the sum of $125.00.
6. (a) Inorder for a deposition to be admissible as evidence at a criminal
trial, certain essential elements must be satisfied.
State them. (4 marks)
(b) Name six (6) offences for which proof of “mens rea” isnotrequired (6 marks)
7. (a) Define the Following terms under the Kidnapping Act, Chapter
11:26 of the Laws of Trinidad and Tobago (the “Act”).
(i) Child; and (2 marks
(ii) Money each)
(iii) Spouse
(b) Explain the provisions of Section 3 (2) of the Act as it relates to
consent. (4 marks)
SECTION B
|
8. Afew months ago Sal started to attend counselling sessions for victims
of domestic abuse. With the support of her group, she eventually
| gained the courage to end the relationship with her male companion
| Hagar. For her safety, she also obtained a protection order from the
court, which restrained Hagar from engaging, in several types of
conduct. Sal recently became fond of Phitts and a close relationship
developed between them. However, Phitts’ friend Spade told him that


--- page break ---

he heard that Sal’s former boyfriend Hagar was out to get him. Spade
advised Phitts to be careful, since Hagar had been imprisoned on
previous occasions for violent crimes. One day, while Phitts was
walking along a street, he noticed Hagar walking on the opposite side.
Phitts became terrified for his safety, and fainted. Hagar moved
towards the crowd and when he saw Phitts on the ground unconscious,
he knelt and pretended to render assistance. While doing so, he
skillfully removed cash from Phitts’ pocket and took an expensive
watch that Phitts was wearing. Hagar then left the scene. However, the
entire occurrence was captured on a nearby surveillance camera, and
Hagar was later arrested.
Discuss fully the offence correct committed by Hagar. In your answer,
you are required to state the related elements of the offence and provide
an appropriate analysis with the given facts in support of your
cone iat. ” 5 PP , Gommtarke)
9. Last year officers Viktor and Chappy received awards for outstanding
performance in the execution of their duties, particularly as it related to
the number of outstanding warrants executed. Earlier this morning
Viktor and Chappy were on duty in their district, when they noticed
Brownboy for whom there was an outstanding warrant at the station.
Brownboy was just about to enter the premises, when the officers took
hold of him. They identified themselves and told him the reason for the
arrest. At that very moment, Brownboy’s brother Brains came out of
the house and inquired what was happening. Officer Chappy told
Brains that there was a warrant at the station for his brother. Brains
then asked them to produce the warrant, whereupon Chappy replied
that it was at the police station. Brains then told the officers that if they
did not release his brother and get out of his property, a law suit will be
filed against them. Viktor told Brains that they will allow Brownboy to
change if he wished, but Brains said that he will have none of it, and
insisted they leave as they were trespassing. He went on to say that his
brother will freshen-up himself and he-Brains will present Brownboy
to the station within one hour. To avoid any confrontation, Viktor and
Chappy reluctantly left and returned to the police station. Brains kept
his word and brought Brownboy to the station accompanied by an
attorney at law. Viktor and Chappy are not pleased with the way things
went, as they feel that it may affect any future commendations they may
receive. They are now agitating for Brains to be prosecuted for an
offence.
| | Discuss fully whether the Brains can be prosecuted for any criminal
| offence. In your answer, you are required to state the related elements
| of the offence and provide an appropriate analysis with the given facts
| in support of your conclusion. (10 marks)
| | 10. Ever since Jimbo had been promoted to supervisor on the job site, Mac
| had been carrying a grudge against him, as he felt that he was more
| dedicated and deserving than Jimbo. One day while passing in front of
Jimbo’s house, Mac detected what he believed to be the scent of
marijuana. Mac saw this as an opportunity to discredit Jimbo, and he
called in a tip through the Crime-Stoppers hotline. Later that day the
| police carried out a search at Jimbo’s premises, where they found
twenty-eight (28) grams of marijuana hidden under a floor-board in


--- page break ---

Jimbo’s house. Jimbo admitted that it was his and said that he used it
for his asthma. The police officers are now discussing what charge they
can lay against Jimbo, in view of the fact that his house is located
opposite a school.
For what offence, if any, can Jimbo be prosecuted? Discuss fully, in
your answer, you are required to discuss the given facts and provide an
appropriate analysis of the applicable law, in support of your
conclusion. (10 marks)
11. One day a retired police officer was walking along the street when she
became suspicious of a man who walked briskly pass her with a
knapsack in his hand. Within seconds of their paths crossing, the retired
officer heard a voice shouting “ thief, thief!” She immediately turned and
called on the man who had just passed her to stop. He fled the scene
and she gave chase. The retired officer eventually caught up, and
subdued him, and took him to the police station, with the knapsack
which contained a stolen laptop computer. Shortly after, the owner of
the laptop arrived at the station. When the senior sentry heard the facts
of the matter, he told the retired police officer that she should have
remembered that she is no longer vested with the powers of arrest
unless an offence is committed in her view, but he had a strategy to
legitimize the occurrence. He then instructed the junior officers to
release the man, and told them to allow him to walk a few feet on the
pavement, and then lawfully arrest him based on the report that had
just been made.
Discuss fully, the appropriateness of the action taken by the senior
sentry. In your answer, you are required to discuss the given facts and
provide an appropriate analysis of the applicable law, in support of
your conclusion. (10 marks)
12. Freddy, who is 24 years of age started to work at an advertising agency
a few months ago. Ms. Kruga, who is 58 years of age is his manager.
Kruga had been frequently praising Freddy for the quality of his work,
and made remarks to him that he showed a lot of potential to move up
ahead of others in the company, and that she will be keeping her eyes
on his progress. However, two of his co-workers warned him that the
word around is that Ms. Kruga has a reputation for relationships with
younger men, and that a few of the young male employees that rejected
| her advancements, found themselves jobless within a short space of
time. One day Freddy and Ms. Kruga were riding in the elevator when
it suddenly jolted. This caused her to bump into him. As they regained
their positions, she smiled at him and said “wow, you have really strong
and protective arms. I will not be worried about trouble with you around.”
| When Freddy shared this information with one of his co-workers, his
| colleague told him that he was warned that she would have made such
| a move. Freddy then left his office and visited the police station where
| he made a complaint against Ms. Kruger, and she was later charged
| with the offence of indecent assault.
|
| Discuss fully, the chances of Ms. Kruga being convicted for this
| offence. In your answer, you are required to discuss the given facts,
and provide an appropriate analysis of the applicable law, in support
| of your conclusion. (10 marks)


--- page break ---

13. Orniss works at a bank as a clerical assistant reconciling accounting
records. Due to a national health threat, only employees classified as
essential were allowed to report for duty at the bank for the duration of
one month. Orniss, was among the employees considered as non-
essential, and was assigned tasks that could have been carried out
remotely. On the last day that all employees were on duty at the bank,
the manager convened a staff meeting to advise the employees on the
work assignments and communication strategies. During the meeting,
Fibber excused himself to visit the male washroom. Fibber met Orniss

’ in the washroom and they started discussing the emergency
arrangement. Fibber voiced his displeasure that others got to stay at
home and work at their leisure, while he had to face the risk and come
out to work. Orniss grinned, and told Fibber that he should feel
important. During the two weeks that followed, the manager
discovered that a large sum of cash had been missing from the vault.
Out of malice, Fibber lied and told the manager that while he was
coming out of the washroom on the last day of normal duties, he had
seen Orniss near the vault. The manager reported this to the police and
a warrant was executed at the home of Orniss, where the missing
money was found. When questioned by investigators, Orniss said that
he was working from home, and as a bank employee he needed to have
ready cash for emergencies.

Discuss fully whether the Orniss can be prosecuted for any criminal
offence. In your answer, you are required to discuss the given facts, and
provide an appropriate analysis of the applicable law, in support of
your conclusion. (10 marks)

14. “The essential elements necessary to establish the offence of burglary
are virtually identical to the essential elements for the offence of
sacrilege. It is often difficult to tell them apart”.

State whether you agree with the above statement. Discuss fully, the
reasons for you answer. (10 marks)
END
|
|
|
|
