.. 
- -.'v· -;..._ 
f:l A-1 "-' • I L f 
--·----
' 
I 
I 
2011 POLI(E PROMOTION (MAIN) EXAMINJ\TION 
TO 1fHE RANK OF SIR(~EANT 
DATE: 9TH ULY 2011 ' 
SUBJECT: LA\ I 
TlME : 2 Yz JOURS 
I 
I 
============~=================~=====--==-===;-====== 
INSTRUCTIONS: 
TillS PAPEI~ CONTA NS FOURTEEN (14) QUESTIONS, CANDIDATES ARE 
REQUIR~b TO ANSV:'ER ANY TEN (10) QUESTIONS . 
NB. QUESTIONS ANSWERED IN EXCESS OF TEN WILL NOT BE ASSESSED . 
TI-llS EXAMINATIOl'i IS WORTH 1.00 MARKS. 
TIIE PASS MARK IS • 0%. 
YOU ARE REMINDE) OF THE NEED TO USE PROPEl< DICTION, CORRECT 
SPELLING, STANDA (D GRAMMAR AND AN ORDERLY, LEGIBL E AND NEAT 
PRESENTATION OF \tOUR WORK. 
WIUTE YOUR EXAJ NATION NUMBER ON THE COVER OF THE 
~· EXAMINATION BOO~<LET AND AT THE TOP OF EVERY PAGE THROUGHOUT 
f THE BOOKLET. 
/ DO NOT WRITJ YOUR NAME AND REGIME NTAL 
NUMBER IN RESPONSE TO ANY QUESTIO~ 
- -



1. (a) =..:....::.....~..:,..crimes for which the consent of the Director of Public 
Prosecutions mst first be obtained before the initiation of criminal 
proceedings . (5 mari<s) 
(b) Nam e five 5 essential ingredients that must be on the face of a search warrant 
to make it val d as to form. (5 marks ) 
2. (a) Name seven 7 circumstances in which a person may intentionally take the 
life of another 1 uman being, and not be held liable for murder or manslaughter. 
(7 mark s) 
(b) One night a wo nan had been complaining to her husband that he was such a miser 
that he would ather see her drenched in perspiration rather than install an air­
conditioning u it to cool the heat in the hous e. The man adv ised her that if she 
could not take t 1e beat she could enjoy the air conditioned comfort of their vehicle 
while she can, ince when she goes to hell there would be no air conditioning to 
enjoy. The wor an took a bottle of water and a book, then sat in the vehicle with 
the air conditio er turned on. Her husband shouted to her not to cause the battery to 
nm down . With that, she turned on the engine in the vehicle. Around 2:00am the 
man rose from ed and realized that his wife was not next to him. On checking the 
vehicle he faun her dead in the seat from carbon monoxide poisoning. The man is 
now saying that he is sorry that he sent her in the car as he never meant for her to 
d ie. 
Can the man be rosecuted for any offence? .. 
Give a brief rea n for your answer. 
(3 marks) 
3. (a) State the essentia l ·lem ents that must be proved to establish the offence of perjury . 
4. 
,,. 
;. 
I 
/ 
5. 
(6 marks) 
(b) What is an inquest (4 marks) 
(a) 
(b) 
(a) 
A person who takes or uses a vehicle without the consent of the owner is 
generally guilt of an offence. Howeve r, Secti on 74 (1) (b) of the Motor Vehicle 
and Road Traf c Act Chap. 48 :50 provides exceptions . 
State futly thes exceptions. (6 marks) 
Section 71 oft e Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Act Chap . 48:50 ("the MV & 
RT") creates th offence of Causing Death by Dangerous Driving, while Section 
71A (1) ofthe s id Act creates the offe nce of Dangerous Driving. 
Explain what is eant by the term 'Dangerous Driving' in accordance with 
Section 71B (1) of the MV & RT. (4 marks) 
As a general rut , the prosecution is required to call all the evidence which it 
intends to rely o before the close of its case. 
State three {3) ceptions to this general rule. (6 marks) 
(b) Explain the mea 'ng of the following terms: 
(i) Hostile 
(ii) Leading (4 mark s) 
1 



;. 
' 
o. State whether the ctivity described in each of the following statements is 
cri m inal or uneth cal by writing the word crimina l or w1ethical as it applies. (10 m a r ks) 
a) Plagiarism by acce sing work on I inc and passing it off as your own . 
b) A police officer us d deception in order to get a confession from a suspect. 
c) A policeman acce 'ts a gift then allows a motorist to park illegally for a short while. 
d) A man knowing! entertains at his home a police officer on duty as a means of 
socializing. 
e) A police officer w tnessed a colleague cheating at an examination and failed to disclose 
the observation. 
f) Lying to someone o convince the person to lend you a sum of money. 
g) A person has be n teaching successfully at an institution under the credentials of 
someone else. 
h) An artist draws pi w·es on cunency notes in order to sell the notes at a higher value than 
their dcnominatio because of the art work. 
i) A championship wimroer looks on and does nothing to save a young child from 
drowning ln a swi ing pool. 
j) Agreeing to accep a monetary reward as compensation for standing as a surety to secure 
bail for a person i custody. 
7 (a) Explain the differe ce, if any, between the detention of a person for questioning 
and the arrest of a erson. (3 marks) 
(b) State the means b which a person may be brought before the court to answer to a 
criminal charge. (3 ma r ks) 
(c) e have no authority to enter private premises without a warrant . 
State four (4) exc tions to this general rule. (4 marks) 
8. At an athletic meeti , a former member of the protect ive services who was the starter of 
races secured his st ing pistol in a leather pouch that was attached to his W1·ist. At the end 
of the racing events went to the cafeteria on the compound with two of his friends to have 
some beverages. Wh n they were finished, they all went to the counter to contribute to the 
cos t of the items con umed. However, the fom1er serviceman, who had removed the pouch 
from his wrist and la d it on the table, forgot to take it up as he went to the cow1ter. They 
paid the bill then w ked out of the cafeteria . Moments after exiting the establishment he 
realized that his po ch was no longer in his possession and he quickly retumed to the 
cafeteria in search o it. On checking the table where he sat he did not see the pouch in 
which he had the st ing pistol, and the attendants at the c ow1ter were 'l.mable to prov ide any 
information as to wh t may have happened with his pouch. Three days later he visited you at 
the station and expla ned what had transpired and in terms of the loss or theft of the starting 
pistol, and remarked at it was a good thing that he was retired otherwise he might have had 
to face a disciplinary barge . 
Can the man be pros cuted for any offence? 
Discuss fu lly stating he applicable law with an appropriate analysis. (10 m arks) 
2 



9. One night a party of poli e officers on mobile patrol observed a motor car with a lone 
occupant proceeding slo ly along a clear roadway . They kept the vehicle under observation 
for a short while and sa that the vehicle would accelerate for mom ents then return to the 
slower speed for no' ap ·ent reason. They intercepted the vehicle which was driven by a 
womru1 ru1d requested h d riving documents . The woman produced a provisional permit 
and said that her friend ad consumed too much alcohol at a party that they attended and in 
order to avoid her friend violating the breathalyzer law, she took control of the vehicle to get 
them home. The officers had in fact observed that there was another female occupant lying 
across the back seat oft e car. On further checking it was discovered that the lady in the 
back seal was the owne r of the vehicle and that she did in fact have a valid driver's permit. 
Can the woman be pros uled for any offence? 
Discuss fully stating the applicable law with an appropriate analysis . (10 ma r ks) 
I 0. Having lost one of h' legs in a motor accident some months ago, a well know n 
advocate against drug buse had been using a pair of crutches to get from one place to 
another. Recently, he a quired a prosthetic leg which had been the property of one of his 
relatives who had died the previous month. Yesterday, whilst sitting on a park bench, 
a police dog on patrol ~ith its handler began sniffing his prosthetic leg and bark ing in an 
alarming manner. The oman police officer handling the dog examine d the hollow p ortion 
of the man's prostheti l eg but only foun d a small remnant of mariju ana resin housed 
in a crevice of the pros etic limb. 
11 
/ 
12. 
Can the man be prosecu ed for any offence? 
Discuss fully stating the applicable law with an appropriate analysis. (10 marks ) 
A young man who want d to impress his new girlfriend invited her to attend a concert that 
featured two internatio al artistes rendering love songs. Howeve r, due to unforeseen 
circumstances , the cone rt was cancelled. He then offered to take her on a trip to one of the 
Caribberu1 islands t o s y at a beach resort for a w eeken d. However, realizing that the 
venture may cost him hefty sum h e said to himse lf "necessity is really the mother of 
invention". He utilized ·s handicraft skills to fashion a piece of wood into the shape of a 
pistol and applied some pray paint to give it the desired colours . The next day he went to a 
jewelry store just before closing time with the improvised pistol in his jacket pocket. Before 
entering the store, he to k the wooden pistol from his pocket looked at it and then placed it 
back into his pocket. H t hen entered the store and announced a hold-up. He placed a small 
sports bag on the count · and demanded tha t the clerk empty trays of jewelry into t he bag 
along with all the cash i 1 the cash register if she did want to get hurt. Fearing for her safety, 
the clerk did as she was old, and he made his exit. However, another store clerk who had 
been hiding near the res room during the event had the entire episode recorded on the video 
·can1era on her mobile one. The clerk used her blackberry messenger service to transmit 
the video that she recor eel to a detec tive that she knew and the video footage enabled the 
police to identify the yo mg man and he was captured later that said evening with the stolen 
items. 
What offence did the yTng man commit? 
Discuss fully stating thj applicable Jaw with an appropriate analysis. (10 marks) 
A student at a tertiary institution who had been receiving individual guidance from one of 
the female lecturers in order to improve his grades mistook her attention to encourage 
him to realize his ac demic potential, for a display of a romantic affection for him. As a 
result of this belief, he began giving hi s friends the impress ion that he shared a secret 
intimate relationshi with the lecturer. His g irlfriend soon got know ledge of the rumor 
3 



I' 
and decided th~ the lecturer needed something to worry about so that she would not 
have time for th[ boyfriend. Around 8:30pm one night the student's girlfriend visited the 
home of the le9turer with the intention of stealing some of the expensive items in the 
house as a means of frustrating the lecturer. She prised open a window with a 
screwdriver and ad her fingers gripped just inside the crack of the window to lift it open 
when the lee r walked into the room . She immediately aborted her plan and had 
tumed to run fr m the scene when the lecturer called out to her and invited her back to 
Did the girl co 
was doing it. A neighbor who had seen the girl's action had already 
ho provided a rapid response. 
it any offence? 
Discuss fully sta ·ng the applicable law with an appropriate analysis . (10 ma rks) 
13. At the end of he shift a cashier removed the sum of $300.00 from the cash register and 
left the establis 1ent. The money was part proceeds of the sales of that clay and was 
discovered missi g by the supervisor at closing time. The supervisor made a report 
which was inves gated by a jun ior officer. The investigator reported that he interviewed 
the cashier and s e stated that she used the money to purchase medication for her ailing 
mother . The inv stigator now seeks your advice regard ing the laying of a charge. 
14. 
Can the cashier b prosecuted for any offence? 
Discuss fully stat' g the applicab le law with an appropriate analysis . (10 marks) 
After a long pe od of negotiations between the representatives for workers of an 
organization and e organization's management with the management refus ing to alter 
their initial offer garding an increase in wages, the representatives eventually accepted 
the management's offer. One of the workers who felt that he had been, betrayed by the 
representatives, te ephoned the receptionist at the office of the worker's association and 
stated that he had laced a bomb on the compo tmd and timed it to explode within twenty 
minutes of his 11. Communication was iinmediatcly made with the police who 
instructed everyo to evacuate the build ing. Howe ver, the leader of the association and 
two of his assista ts who had been having a committee meeting refused to leave the 
building stating th t it was not the first time that they had a 'bomb scare' and it usually 
turned out to be a oax. At the expiration of the twenty minute period the bomb exploded 
killing the associ ion leader, his two assistants and two bomb disposal officers who 
were trying to per uade them to leave the compound . The worker claims that he cannot 
be blamed for th ·r not leaving the building, and that he was only trying to cause a 
disruption and nev r intended to harm anyone. 
Can the worker b held liable for the deaths that occurred as a result of the exploding 
bomb? 
Discuss fully stati g the applicable law with an appropriate analys is. (10 mar ks) 
END 
4 