 
 
2017 POLICE PROMOTION (MAIN) EXAMINATION 
TO THE RANK OF CORPORAL 
 
 
SUBJECT   : LAW 
DATE   : 29th JULY, 2017 
TIME ALLOWED : 2 ½ HOURS 
 
 
 
INSTRUCTIONS: 
THIS PAPER CONTAINS FOURTEEN (14) QUESTIONS.  CANDIDATES ARE 
REQUIRED TO ANSWER ANY TEN (10)  QUESTIONS EACH OF  WHICH WILL 
CARRY TEN (10) MARKS. 
 
 
NB:- QUESTIONS ANSWERED IN EXCESS OF TEN WILL NOT BE 
CORRECTED. 
 
THE EXAMINATION IS WORTH 100 MARKS. 
 
 
THE PASS MARK IS 50% 
 
 
YOU ARE REMINDED OF THE NEED TO USE PROPER DICTION, CORRECT 
SPELLING, STANDARD GRAMMAR  AND AN ORDERLY, LEGIBLE AND NEAT 
PRESENTATION OF YOUR WORK. 
 
WRITE YOUR EXAMINATION NUMBER ON THE COVER OF THE 
EXAMINATION ANSWER BOOKLET AND ON THE TOP OF EVERY PAGE 
THROUGHOUT THE BOOKLET. 
 
 
DO NOT WRITE YOUR NAME AND REGIMENTAL NUMBER IN 
RESPONSE TO ANY QUESTION 
 
  



1. State whether the following are true or false: 
 
(10 marks) 
 a) A person can be prosecuted for an offence of Harassment under  
the Offences Against the Persons Act Ch.11:08. 
 
 
 b) Once a criminal prosecution has been instituted privately or by 
other authority, the Director of Public Prosecutions can no longer 
take over criminal prosecutions in the matter.  
 
 
 c) All indictable offences are also arrestable offences. 
 
 
 d) A dumb person is not a competent witness. 
 
 
 e) A “Time Allowed Commitment” warrant can be executed at any 
time and any place. 
 
 
 f) An unlawful but slight touch is insufficient to constitute a battery 
under the criminal law; proof of actual harm is required. 
 
 
 g) Unlawfully obtained evidence may still be admitted at the court. 
 
 
 h) The failure to stand at attention during the playing of the National 
Anthem is a summary offence. 
 
 
 i) A witness summons must be served by an authorized officer, at 
least 24 hours before the date of hearing. 
 
 
 j) Habeas Corpus is a Latin phrase that means ‘you have the body’. 
 
 
 
2. a) The admissibility of evidence at court embraces what is known as 
the ‘Best Evidence Rule’. Name four (4) circumstances under 
which secondary evidence may be admitted.   
            
 
 
(8 marks) 
 b) Where a defendant fails to appear in court on the date of his case 
section 44 of the Summary Offences Act Chapter 4:20 provides 
that a magistrate may do one of three things, one of which is that 
the magistrate may issue a warrant for the defendant. Name th e 
other two options available to a magistrate in such a circumstance.
  
 
 
 
 
(2 marks) 
 
 
3. Where a vehicle is parked on a road in contravention of any of the 
provisions of the Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Act Chapter 48:50 
(“the Act”), or is left in any road in such a manner that it is likely to 
cause an obstruction to persons  lawfully using any such road, S ection 
108 (1) of the Act provides two actions that a police officer may take.  
  
Discuss fully the two (2) courses of actions that m ay be taken in 
accordance with Section 108 (1) of the Act.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(10 marks) 
 
4. a) State the essential elements of the offence of Larceny by Finding.  
  
 
(4 marks) 
 b) A man parked his car at the roadside, secured it and left to attend 
a theatrical play. D, a notorious car thief repainted the man’s 
vehicle in another colour and replaced the registration plates with 
false plates of his own. When the man returned to the posi tion 
 
 
 
 



where he had parked his vehicle he did not recognize it 
anywhere. He hastened to the police station and told the sentry 
on duty that his car had been stolen. The police immediately 
made arrangements to view CCTV video f ootage of the area and 
observed what had taken place along with the identity of the 
offender.                                       
 
For what offence, if any, can D be prosecuted? State briefly the 
reasons for your answer.                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(6 marks) 
5. Define any five (5) of the following terms under the criminal law:    
 
(2 marks 
each) 
 i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
v) 
vi) 
Ab initio 
Disclosure of evidence 
Fact in issue 
Irrebuttable presumption 
Judicial notice 
Summary offence 
 
 
 
6. a) State the essential elements necessary to establish the offence of 
Perjury.    
 
 
(4 marks) 
 b) Last week Jay’s younger brother was arrested by the police on 
suspicion of being part of a trio that committed home invasion 
offences. Jay protested and stated that his brother could not have 
been involved, because they had been out at another location, 
camping and fishing and had been together at the material time. 
In fact, Jay knew that his brother had been associating with known 
criminal characters, and they were not together at the time in 
question. Jay’s brother was positively identified by the witnesses 
and charged with offences in relation to larceny and violence 
against the occupants of the home. As a means of giving his 
brother an alibi, Jay visited a Commissioner of Affidavits and 
made a sworn statement in which he stated that his brother was at 
another location at the material time, and therefore could not have 
been one of the offenders as alleged by the police.  
 
State whether Jay can be prosecuted for the offence of Perjury 
based on the representations that he made on behalf of his brother. 
Give a brief reason for your answer.      
 
                                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(6 marks) 
7. a) Inchoate Offences are offences that cover illegal acts that are yet to 
be committed.  Name the three (3) types of inchoate offences.                                                
 
(3 marks) 
 
 b) State the ways in which a person may be brought before a 
Magistrates’ Court to answer a criminal charge.                                                                           
 
(3 marks) 
 
 c) State four (4) defenses to the offence of assault by beating. 
 
(4 marks) 
 
 
8. A’s  fifteen year old son, is frequently taunted by his peers as being 
anti-social, and a threat to the security of what they called the 
”Neighborhood Security Service ” (“the NSS”). In fact, the NSS 
consisted of the thugs and miscreants in the area, who came t ogether 
as a gang that engaged in extorting money from persons in the 
 
 
 
 
 



neighborhood. Individuals would pay in order to avoid suffering 
physical hurt as they traversed to and from their homes. A’s son often 
managed to elude the gang, but on many occasions he  suffered 
beatings as he refused to give in to the gang’s demands. One evening 
while A was at home, he received information that the NSS gang had 
his son surrounded. A was informed that the gang planned to deliver 
a beating on his son as a special lesson, that would also serve as a 
warning to others. A realized that he had to act in the defence of his 
son. He visited a neighbour, explained his situation and borrowed the  
neighbour’s licensed shotgun. A hurried to the area and saw the gang 
members inflicting blows upon his son. He immediately discharged a 
shot into the air to scare off his son’s attackers. The gang members 
dispersed at the sound of the explosion. A helped his son to his feet 
and they headed to their home. As A was about to return the shotgun 
to his neighbour, a police constable on patrol , unaware of what had 
transpired, arrested A and took him to the police station.  
     
Discuss fully whether A can be pros ecuted for any offence. In your 
answer, you are required to state the applicable law and produce the 
appropriate analysis based on the given facts.  You are also to disregard 
discussion on any offence relating to the discharging of the shot into 
the air.     
                                                                                       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(10 marks) 
9. One afternoon as D was walking past a church, the decorative glass 
panes on the church windows caught his attention. As he gazed upon 
the window panes, the thought entered his mind that they were quite 
expensive. He concluded that it must have been divine intervention 
that he passed this way, and that he should not ignore a blessing in 
disguise.  D calculated that he could fetch a tidy sum for a few of the 
window panes, and that no one would be hurt, as the parishioners 
would be pleased to pay for the replacement through their offerings. D 
leaned against the wall of the building and forced open three of the 
windows. With the use of a sharp instrument, he removed several of 
the expensive decorative glass panes from the church windows and 
fled the scene. However, his entire act ivity had been captured on 
nearby security cameras, and D was later arrested by the police.    
 
For what offence can D be prosecuted? Discuss fully the reason for 
your answer. Your answer should state the applicable law and produce 
the appropriate analysis based on the given facts.                                                                                                          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(10 marks) 
 
 
10. Since Julie began taking self-defence classes late last year, her attitude 
became boastful. She repeatedly criticized those of her peers who 
voiced their fears for personal safety, due to the reports of crime in the 
country. Julie often bragged that she wa s ready for anyone that 
confronted her, and she was not going to let the best years of her life 
pass by whilst cowering from a few criminals. Julie would stay out late 
at nights, and jokingly speak of the dimly lit areas that she traversed, 
as she went from one place to another. Julie’s good friend Kate, found 
that Julie was too careless in her over -confidence, particularly as Julie 
had only attended a few self-defence classes over the last few months. 
With the intention of helping her friend realize that t here is no utility 
in provoking danger, Kate made contact with her three cousins Curly, 
Larry and Moe.  Kate asked them to put a good scare into Julie as a 
demonstration that she should not be over -confident with her self-
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



defense skill. The next evening while Julie was walking along a dimly 
lit street Curly, Larry and Moe surrounded her and demanded her 
valuables. Julie started to shake and forgot all about her self -defence 
training. She handed over her handbag and the trio left the scene.  
 
Discuss fully whether Curly, Larry and Moe  committed any offence. 
In your answer, you are required to state the applicable law and 
produce the appropriate analysis based the given facts.       
                                                                         
                             
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(10 marks) 
11. Girlie jumped out of her bed and realized that she had overslept and 
would be late for an important interview. She quickly got dressed, got 
into her car and drove off. In the process, the back of the car came into 
contact with her garbage can which tipped over spreading the contents 
over her lawn. Girlie noticed what happened but drove off anyway. 
Whilst proceeding on the highway at 90 kilometers per minute, she 
observed the flashing lights of vehicles going in the opposite direction 
and reduced her speed in time so that she was not caught in the police 
exercise ahead. As she approached her destination a policeman who 
was standing in the street signaled for her to stop. She brought her car 
to a halt alongside him. However, she did not realize that her front 
wheel had stopped on the policeman’s foot causing him pain. He 
brought it to her attention and asked her to move the car, but she told 
him that he should at least first explain why he stopped  her. The 
policeman then repeated his request to which she compli ed. As the 
policeman limped away Girlie noticed a space within which she could 
park, even though it was in front of a fire hydrant.  Girlie reversed and 
parked in the space justified by the fact that she was certain that her 
stay would not be long. On ente ring the building she walked to the 
visitors’ refreshment table, and helped herself to cup  of water before 
asking for it. She then approached the receptionist and identified 
herself and the purpose of her visit. The receptionist sucked her teeth, 
looked at the wall clock and told Girlie that she was not serious. Girlie 
told the receptionist that she needed to be blessed and threw the cup 
of water at her. As Girlie turned to leave the premises the security 
officer attempted to stop her but she flung her arm to push him out of 
the way. However, he shifted and her arm came into contact with 
Singer who was standing close behind the security officer.  
 
Name five (5) offences committed by Girlie. In each instance explain 
briefly the legal reason for your answer. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(10 marks) 
 
12. Mona purchased a new mobile telephone and she showed it off to 
almost everyone at the office. When Lisa saw the phone she remarked 
loudly ‘that phone real nice boy. She best hold it tight’.  Last Friday when 
Mona left the office, she forgot the mobile telephone on her desk. Lisa 
realized what had happened and she smiled. She decided to keep the 
telephone until Monday when they are all out to work. She looked 
around to see if anyone was watchi ng at her, and confident that the 
coast was clear, she took up the mobile telephone and placed it inside 
her handbag.  On her way home she used Mona’s mobile telephone to 
make a couple calls to friends, then returned it to the inside of her 
handbag. On Saturday Mona made a report to the police and based on 
information received, the police visited Lisa at her home and retrieved 
the phone. Despite the explanation that she gave, Lisa was charged 
with the offence of Larceny of Mona’s mobile telephone. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
Discuss fully whether Lisa can be convicted for this offence.   In your 
answer, you are required to state the applicable law and produce the 
appropriate analysis based on the given facts.                                                                                                                    
 
 
 
 
 
(10 marks) 
13. G, a pensioner, was going on a visit abroad to assist her granddaughter 
who had recently given birth to a son. While waiting to check-in at the 
airport terminal, G’s niece N gave her two tins of a popular chocolate 
flavored food drink in powdered form, and asked her to deliver them 
to a friend when she arrived at her destination. She explained to G that 
the person would contact her and collect for the tins of the powdered 
drink. Unknown to G, each tin had three grams of cocaine concealed in 
it. As G’s turn reached to approach the check -in counter, she was 
confronted by members of the Narcotic Unit and arrested. A search of 
her luggage revealed the concealed illicit narcotic.  G has maintained 
her lack of knowledge about the illicit drugs. H owever, based on 
instructions the officers charged G with the offence of Possession of the 
narcotic for the purpose of trafficking.     
  
Discuss fully  whether G can be convicted for this offence. In your 
answer, you are required to state the applicable law and produce the 
appropriate analysis based on the given answer.          
 
                                                                                                        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(10 marks) 
14. D who had been in and out of prison for a number of theft offences 
over the past few years, decided that it was time that he left that type 
of life. However, he believed that police officers always needed 
something to keep them vigilant, so he started to coach a few of the 
younger men  in the area ‘ the fine art of pick pocketing’. D would run 
simulations in an open yard at the back of his home, during which he 
would demonstrate to the young men how he used to relieve items 
from the person of individuals, through brief but seemingly accidental 
contact with the intended victim. One day D’s sister was the victim of 
a purse snatching and in giving a statement to the police; she told the 
officers about the activities that her bother carried on at the back of his 
compound. Later that afternoon, a party of officers conducted a 
surveillance exercise based on the information received from D’s sister, 
and observed D performing the acts as described by his sister.   
  
Discuss fully whether D can be prosecuted for any offence . In your 
answer, you are required to state the applicable law and produce  the 
appropriate analysis based on the given facts.        
                                                         
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(10 marks) 
       
         
 
END 
     
  
 
        
 
 
 
             
 