2021 POLICE PROMOTION (MAIN) EXAMINATION
TO THE RANK OF CORPORAL

SUBJECT ; LAW
DATE : 18th SEPTEMBER, 2021
TIME ALLOWED 7 2% HOURS
INSTRUCTIONS:
THIS PAPER CONTAINS FOURTEEN (14) QUESTIONS. CANDIDATES ARE
REQUIRED TO ANSWER ANY TEN (10) QUESTIONS EACH OF WHICH WILL
CARRY TEN (10) MARKS.
THE PASS MARK IS 50%
THE EXAMINATION BOOKLET MUST BE DONE IN A BLACK OR BLUE INK PEN
ONLY. YOU ARE REQUIRED TO WRITE YOUR EXAMINATION NUMBER ON
THE COVER OF THE EXAMINATION ANSWER BOOKLET AND ON THE TOP OF
EVERY PAGE THROUGHOUT THE BOOKLET.
YOU ARE REMINDED OF THE NEED TO USE PROPER DICTION, CORRECT
SPELLING, STANDARD GRAMMAR AND AN ORDERLY, LEGIBLE AND NEAT
PRESENTATION OF YOUR WORK.
EACH QUESTION MUST BEGIN ON A NEW PAGE.
DO NOT WRITE YOUR NAME, INITIALS OR REGIMENTAL NUMBER
ANYWHERE IN YOUR EXAMINATION ANSWER BOOKLET.
DO NOT IDENTIFY YOURSELF IN ANYWAY OTHER THAN YOUR
EXAMINATION CANDIDATE NUMBER.

NB:- QUESTIONS ANSWERED IN EXCESS OF TEN WILL NOT BE
CORRECTED.


--- page break ---

SECTION A
1. (a) Inchoate Offences are offences that cover illegal acts that are yet to
be committed.
Name the three (3) types of inchoate offences. (3 marks)
(b) State the ways in which a person may be brought before a
Magistrates’ Court to answer a criminal charge. (3 marks)
(c) State four (4) defenses to the offence of assault by beating. (4 marks)
2. (a) Inaccordance with Section 2 of the Prevention of Crime (Offensive
Weapons) Act, Chapter 11:09 (the “Act”) state the three (3) means
by which an article may be categorized as an offensive weapon. (3 marks)
(b) Give three (3) examples of offensive weapons, illustrating one
example that represents each of the three means stated at part (a). (3 marks)
(c) In accordance with Section 3 of the Act, state the four (4) essential
elements that must be present to establish the offence of possession
of an offensive weapon. (4 marks)
3. Section 5 (2) of the Dangerous Drugs Act, Chapter 11:25 as amended,
states that a person found in possession of more than certain quantities
of specified dangerous drugs, will be deemed to be in possession of the
dangerous drug for the purpose of trafficking, unless the contrary is
proven.
List correctly any five (5) of the specified dangerous drugs with the
corresponding quantities. (10 marks)
4. (a) Rule 2 of the Judges Rules for Children 2016 (the “Rules”) on
questioning before the search of a child, provides at Principle 3(a)
that where after questioning a child, a police officer’s suspicion is
confirmed or the questioning reveals reasonable grounds to
believe that the child is in possession of any unlawful article or
substance, the police officer shall caution the child before putting
any further questions to the child.
Write the words of the prescribed caution that is to be
administered to the child. (5 marks)
(b) Clause 2 of the Consent Principles under the Rules states that if a
child is blind, seriously visually impaired or unable to read or
suffering from any other disorder, the custody officer or
identification officer shall make sure that one of seven persons is
available to explain the information to the child.
List any five (5) of the specified persons. (5 marks)


--- page break ---

5. (a) State four (4) exceptions to the meaning of the term ‘parking’ as
defined at Section 2 of the Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Act,
Chapter 48:50 (“the MV&RT Act”). (8 marks)
(b) Define the term ‘private motor car’ under Section 2 of the MV&RT
Act (2 marks)
6. (a) Section 3A (1) of the Praedial Larceny Act Prevention Act Chapter
10:03 (the “Act”), defines the term ‘Memorandum of Sale or
Delivery’ (the “Memorandum”) and mandates that the
Memorandum shall contain specific particulars. Section 3A (2) of
the Act itemizes the four (4) particulars that must be contained in
the Memorandum.
State the four (4) particulars that must be contained in the
Memorandum. (8 marks)
(b) Define the term “Purchaser” under Section 3A (1) of the Act. (2 marks)
7. (a) Section 3(b) of the Larceny Act Chapter 11:12 (the “Act”) states that
the meaning of the expression ‘takes’ in the definition of steal under
the Act, includes the obtaining of possession of the item stolen by
either of four (4) means.
Name them (4 marks)
(b) In order to establish the offence of fraudulent conversion under
Section 21(c) of the Act, the property misappropriated by the
defendant must have been entrusted to him with the instruction to
do one of four specific things.
Name them (4 marks)
(c) Define the term ‘night’ under Section 2(1) of the Act. (2 marks)
8. One morning Razor went into a mini mart to purchase a six-pack of his
favourite beers. When he went to the cashier’s counter, she noticed that
he was not wearing a face mask as required by the Public Order
Regulations. She refused to conduct the transaction and immediately
pointed to a sign on display and said “Razor, yuh know the drill, no mask,
no service, | can’t do business with you like that.” Razor responded by
saying “Ok, doh serve me, I go serve mehself’. He then hustled out of the
mini mart with the items. The proprietor at the mini mart quickly called
the police to report that Razor was out in the public, and he was not
wearing any face mask. The police caught up with Razor some distance
away, but by that time he was wearing a face mask covering all the areas
required by the regulations.
Discuss fully whether Razor can be prosecuted for any offence. In your
answer, you are required to state the related elements of the offence,
and provide an appropriate analysis based on the given facts in support
of your conclusion. (10 marks)


--- page break ---

9. Beau and his girlfriend Cherrie were at a party celebrating the lifting of
the Covid19 restrictions. When the disc jockey started to play soca
music, Beau left to get refreshments at the bar. Upon his return Cherrie
pointed to Wileman and told Beau that while he was at the bar,
Wileman started gyrating on her from behind, and she had a bit of a
scuffle with him when she tried to push him away. On hearing this,
Beau approached Wileman and warned him to keep away from his
girlfriend. About twenty minutes later while Cherrie was on the dance
floor, Beau noticed that Wileman was inching his way to get behind
Cherrie while gyrating his mid-section. Beau immediately advanced
towards Wileman and punched him in the face while saying “Ent ah tell
yuh to watch you distance?”. Wileman fell backwards and received a
blow to his head which caused it to be swollen and bruised. Wileman
made a report to the police and wants Beau charged with an assault
related offence. When the police interviewed Beau, he explained the
entire incident to them, and stated that he was only acting in defense of
his girlfriend at the time.

Discuss fully whether Beau can be prosecuted for any criminal offence.
In your answer, you are required to state the related elements of the
offence and provide an appropriate analysis with the given facts in
support of your conclusion. (10 marks)

10. A pedestrian found an elderly woman lying on the ground. She was
conscious but bruised from an attack and mugging that occurred a few
minutes earlier. The woman related that the thugs who attacked her
took her purse and that she was still in fright. However, she pulled out
a money wallet and told the pedestrian that they did not find the wallet,
which had $2,200 cash in it. After calling 999 to get help for the woman,
the pedestrian snatched the wallet from the woman’s hands and ran off.
It happened so quickly that the woman had no time to react. The
authorities caught the pedestrian soon thereafter, and charged him with
an offence under the Larceny Act Chapter 11:12.

State correctly the offence that the pedestrian committed? Discuss
fully, and in your answer, you are required to refer to the given facts,
and provide an appropriate analysis with the elements of the applicable
offence, in support of your conclusion. (10 marks)

11. Ten months ago, H lost his job when the company at which he worked
went into receivership. Since then, he spent most of his time at home
viewing television to the disgust of his wife W. About three months ago
H and W had an altercation during which she yelled at him saying “ You
just laying around the house, eating and drinking, watching Black Lives
Matter news and swelling-up. I fed up of yuh laziness.” The following week
H received an opportunity from his former employer Mr. B. Mr. B told
H that he was setting-up a new business and that he had a job for H,
whereby H will work from 3:00pm to mid-night four days per week.
Mr. B added that the compensation would be a small stipend, but upon
opening H will be hired as a supervisor. H immediately accepted, but
did not disclose anything about it to W, as he wanted to surprise her
when he got the position of supervisor. Since then, W noticed that H
was no longer staying home and that he was getting in late every night.


--- page break ---

She became suspicious that he may have been having an extra-marital
affair, and started complaining about his long absences away from
home. Late one evening while H and W sat at their dinner table, H
received a telephone call from Mr. B. He excused himself from the
dinner table and went into the bedroom to take the call. While speaking,
H told Mr. B that sometimes he does not know what to do to please W.
He added that when he stayed home, she fussed, now he goes out, she
makes a fuss. Mr. B smiled and replied that soon she will be happy with
his surprise. Mr. B added that H just needed to keep the faith and be
graceful when speaking with her, and just now he will see joy in his
household. As H started to reply, W quietly peeked into the bedroom
to listen in on his conversation. In so doing she heard him saying the
following words: “Nah, I holding on to meh faith and ah good with grace. I
just banking on your word that I will get joy.” On overhearing those words
W became furious as she burst into the room accusing H of being a
womanizer while shouting “Not one, but three side chick yuh want, Faith,
Joy and Grace? Yuh gone too far!” With that, she drew a knife and fatally
stabbed H several times in his chest. W was subsequently charged with
murder. At her trial, she put forward a defense of provocation.
Discuss fully, whether W will be successful with this defense. In your
answer, you are required to refer to the given facts and provide an
appropriate analysis with the applicable elements to the defense in
support of your conclusion. (10 marks)
12. Around 9:30am one morning, Abe walked into a bank, approached a
female customer service representative (“CSR”), and handed her a note
which read “This is a hold-up. If you raise an alarm, you'll be sorry!”
With a smile on his face, Abe then gave her another piece of paper with
a name and an account number written upon it, and told her keep
smiling and to bring up that account. He then asked her how much
money was in the account, to which she replied the sum of $782. 67. He
then told her to give him the sum of exactly $782.00, and to keep the
change. She did as she was told, whereupon he said in a pleasant tone
of voice “You have a nice day sweetheart. Just remember what I tell yuh eh”.
However, the security officers at the bank had noticed a look of fright
on the face of the CSR, and they intercepted Abe on the steps of the
bank, just as he exited the doors. On checking the bank’s records, it was
discovered that Abe’s name was recorded as the holder of the account
from which the money had been taken.
What offence, if any, did Abe commit? Discuss fully, and in your
answer, you are required to refer to the facts given in the question, and
provide an appropriate analysis of the applicable law, in support of
your conclusion. (10 marks)
13. Katt is employed as a cashier at a wholesale food depot operated by a
former police officer. She works from 10:00am to 6:00pm from Monday
to Friday of the work week, and from 8:00am to 12:00 noon on
Saturdays. She however, receives her weekly wages on Friday
afternoons. Katt became annoyed when she realized that her employer
had posted unreasonable price increases on his goods, at a time when
the Covid19 pandemic had caused hardship on so many homes. One
Friday afternoon while at work, Katt secretly removed $3,000.00 from


--- page break ---

the cash register and hid it in her handbag. At the end of the day, she
handed the money received from the day’s sales to her employer, less
the sum she had taken for herself. The following week when the
proprietor was reviewing the recordings from his surveillance cameras,
he detected the misappropriation of his money by Katt. He made a
report to the police that he was embezzled by one of his employees, and
he wants her prosecuted as a deterrence to others.
What offence, if any, has Katt committed? Discuss fully, and in your
answer, you are required to refer to the given facts, and provide an
appropriate analysis with the elements of the applicable offence, in
support of your conclusion. (10 marks)
14. Dibble an estate constable, is very protective of his younger sister
Storm and would often quarrel with her about her flirtatious conduct
with men. Unknown to Dibble, Storm, who recently turned eighteen,
started posing for semi-nude photographs of herself, to make some
extra money. Her neighbour who is the photographer, told her that the
photos will be published in foreign magazines. One afternoon while
Dibble was at work, one of his colleagues showed him semi-nude
photos of Storm that were on the internet. Dibble immediately went
home to speak with Storm but their mother said that as far as she knew,
Storm was at Hugh the neighbour doing something with pictures.
Dibble made his way into Hugh’s house and demanded that his
younger sister leave. Hugh told Dibble that he was not welcome at his
home and demanded that Dibble leave. Dibble responded by saying
“Just remember that I am a police officer, and | eh leaving without that child.”
Hugh repeated his insistence that Dibble leave. However, Dibble
stood his ground saying that Hugh cannot tell a police officer what to
do. At that point with the assistance of a friend who was present, Hugh
forcibly ejected Dibble from the premises and secured his entrance
gate.
You are on duty as the supervising corporal at the district station when
Dibble came to you and reported what transpired. Dibble desires that
Hugh be apprehended and charged with the offence of assault on a
police officer in the execution of his duty.
Discuss fully, the chances of Hugh being convicted for this offence. In
your answer, you are required to refer to the given facts, and provide
an appropriate analysis with the elements of the applicable offence, in
support of your conclusion. (10 marks)
END
