2021 POLICE PROMOTION (MAIN) EXAMINATION
TO THE RANK OF INSPECTOR

SUBJECT : BUSINESS COMMUNICATION
DATE : 10 uly, 2021
TIME ALLOWED : 2 %2 HOURS
INSTRUCTIONS:
THIS PAPER HAS TWO (2) SECTIONS - A AND B. CANDIDATES MUST ANSWER
BOTH SECTIONS.
CANDIDATES ARE REQUIRED TO PASS BOTH SECTIONS TO BE DEEMED
SUCCESSFUL IN THE EXAMINATION.
THE PASS MARK IS 50%
THE EXAMINATION IS WORTH 100 MARKS EACH SECTION CARRIES EQUAL
WEIGHTING.
IN A BLACK OR BLUE INK PEN, WRITE YOUR EXAMINATION NUMBER ON THE
COVER OF THE EXAMINATION ANSWER BOOKLET AND ON THE TOP OF
EVERY PAGE THROUGHOUT THE BOOKLET.
YOU ARE REMINDED OF THE NEED TO USE PROPER DICTION, CORRECT
SPELLING, STANDARD GRAMMAR AND AN ORDERLY, LEGIBLE AND NEAT
PRESENTATION OF YOUR WORK.
EACH QUESTION MUST BEGIN ON A NEW PAGE.
DO NOT WRITE YOUR NAME, INITIALS OR REGIMENTAL NUMBER
ANYWHERE IN YOUR EXAMINATION ANSWER BOOKLET.
DO NOT IDENTIFY YOURSELF IN ANYWAY OTHER THAN YOUR
EXAMINATION CANDIDATE NUMBER.

1[/Page


--- page break ---

Section A
As a Police Inspector, in charge of a large police station for a District described in the case
study below, you have been asked to submit a report to your immediate supervisor.
Using the information provided, you are to prepare a report of a minimum of (500) words
with the following features:
a) A cover page including a suitable title
b) The communication principles for this type of report
c) Appropriate hea lings and sub-headings
d) Presentation c f aata to increase clarity
e) Conclusions a 1d inferences
f) Recommendat.ons
g) Written in Sta: dard English (in your own words)
The borough of Sangomantz, situated in County Aviran ina small Caribbean country has
a population of approximately 42,000 persons. A high percentage of this population is
between the ages of 16 and 4) years. Sangomante covers nearly 50 square miles and is
primarily a residential comr..unity with a small number of commercial and industrial
businesses. There are two local Pulice Station with approximately 15 officers and 4
civilian employees each. The CAPA, established in October 2015, reports directly to the
Divisional Administration.
The Divisional Administration provides operational support, allowing the CAPA to
conduct comprehensive analyses to identify and address emerging patterns and trends.
In late February 2020, the main CAPA analyst, Inspector Terrence Vantino, noted an
increasing problem concerning a large bar in Sangomante: Runty’s Late Limers’ Saloon.
In contrast, Smokey’s Tavern which was located nearer the centre of the town was
showing a welcome decrease in incidents of a similar nature.
According to the owner of Runty’s, the bar “attracts all kinds of folks. We get a real
variety in here, from “zessers” to university kids to working class...just everyone.” He
boasted that to prevent problems, the bouncers were very aggressive and regularly used
physical force to throw people out of the bar.
During the period November 2019 to April 2020, the CAPA statistics showed that patrol
officers had reported a number of chronic problems with which they had to deal. 100
drivers had been breathalyzed close to Runty’s and had been found to be considerably
over the legal limit; 10 persons had been charged with having illegal drugs on their
person in its parking lot. Excessive noise, overcrowding and urinating against
neighbours’ walls were other nuisance offenses which had been reported 15 times.
Runty’s had been the site of 50 assault and battery reports. Two deaths had occurred in
the 6 months under review- a knifing assault inside the establishment and a second in
2| Page


--- page break ---

the parking lot after the victim had been physically ejected by a bouncer. In contrast,
Smokey’s had no deaths or drug offenses, had met the divisional average of 20 assault
and battery reports and had had approximately 15 persons demonstrating the other types
of behaviour.
In May 2020, the crime analyst downloaded a problem-solving guide, “ Assaults in and
Around Bars” (Scott, 2001), from the Center for Problem-Oriented Policing (POP Center)
website. Prior to reading it, the analyst had sought permission to contact the nearest
station’s patrol sergeant and requested a meeting to discuss the problems at Runty’s and
possible actions that could be taken.
At that meeting the patrol sergeant and his team examined the report presented by the
analyst but felt that of particular concern was the total disregard and disrespect for law
enforcement personnel in the environment in and around the premises. He noted that,
Runty’s was known as one of the major sports bars in the area where self-proclaimed
gangsters who engaged in shooting firearms into the air liked to ‘hang out’ yet these
firearms couldn’t be found when incidents were reported. The bar was also frequented
by young and boasting about their possessions despite a relatively high youth
unemployment rate in the district. In short, as one patrol officer stated, “It is going to be
one hell of a task to clean this place up.” The sergeants also noted that the station had
been visited recently by a University researcher who had spent some time investigating
the living conditions and attitudes of the kind of patrons who frequented Runty’s. The
researcher had reported that some of the older heads had suggested that the loosely
controlled fete atmosphere in and around this particular property was contributing to the
problem but it also had to do with an idleness and search for distraction among the young
people that was leading to the situation. Some of the possible solutions offered included

e better social, sporting and/or educational youth facilities,

e sponsorships for youth activists to form youth groups based on interests e.g. video

games
e greater use of community service as responses to minor criminal activity rather |
than fines and jail sentences

Before moving forward, Inspector Vantino contacted his immediate supervisor regarding
his concerns about Runty’s, and he proposed using the “ Assaults in and Around Bars”
guide to help address the situation. He noted that the station nearest to Smokey’s had
used the following actions over the last 3 months and saw good results. In short, that
station would respond to situations with mass patrol deployment/enforcement over a
number of days to calm things down and reduce criminal activity. Typically, the patrol
officers would pick the busiest nights and enforce every possible ordinance outside the
establishment. Each time such an enforcement was scheduled, it required five or six


--- page break ---

officers plus a sergeant (all working overtime), in addition to the eight street officers
scheduled to work patrol those nights.
However, although Inspector Vantino realized that a tactical mass enforcement over
several weeks would likely calm the activity for a time, it was obvious, based on the
concerns of the patrol sergeant overseeing Runty’s, that there were environmental issues
which were greatly contributing to disorder. Ultimately, the supervisor agreed that the
new initiative could be deployed and promised command support. However, he advised
that the station’s patrol sergeant and Vantino should dedicate up to 3 weeks to gather as
much information as possible and come up with a plan to take advantage of the
researcher's suggestions. At the end of the three weeks, Vantino was to provide a report
for him to take to the Divisional Executive describing the situation at Runty’s and its
environment with at least three relevant strategies to meet the current situation.
Adapted from: COPS Crime Analysis Case Studies. Retrieved from:
https://cops.usdoj.gov/RIC/Publications/cops-w0605-pub.pdf
4 |


--- page break ---

Section B
Instructions
As the Police Inspector in charge of the Morvant Police Station you have received a report
from Police Constable Nayash Singh about an incident which occurred at KFC Morvant
Junction. On the basis of the report, write a memorandum to the Assistant
Superintendent of Police that provides a summary of the details presented in the scenario
below. Your response should include any action that you have taken or have directed
your juniors to take to treat with the issues raised in the scenario. Your response should
provide a summary of the state of your investigation as well as any further action that
you propose to take or instructions given to your investigating team to treat with the
matters raised.
The memorandum should be no more than 500 words and should include the following:-

a. Appropriate heading

b. The standard elements of a memorandum

c. Written in Standard English
On Sunday 7® July, 2019, at approximately 8:30 p.m., Mr. Ken St. Bernard of #15 Larencia
Crescent, San Juan was assaulted and robbed in the KFC drive through at Morvant
Junction. Mr. Nazmoon Khan, who was sitting in his vehicle, saw the incident and called
the police. Police Constables Nayash Singh and Janton Bailey of the Morvant Police
Station arrived within minutes and conducted preliminary inquiries.
It is noted that the compound, has a gas station and convenience store, has exits that
provide easy access to major roadways, that is, the Eastern Main Road, the Priority Bus
Route and the Churchill Roosevelt Highway.
On interviewing Mr. St. Bernard, PC Singh recorded the following information:
“Mr. Ken St. Bernard of #15 Larencia Crescent, San Juan is a martial arts expert who
operates a school teaching self-defence techniques. On the given date, Mr. St. Bernard
drove his vehicle, a Toyota Axio, Registration No. SNB 4910, to the KFC fast food drive-
thru service window. At that point, he was approached by a masked person standing on
the driver's side of the vehicle who pointed what appeared to be a gun at him. The
assailant ordered Mr. St. Bernard to hand over his leather wallet containing various cards
and cash, his Samsung A30 cell phone and his stainless steel analog Baroncelli watch, all
items with a total value $12,000.

5|Page


--- page break ---

Mr. St. Bernard reported that he grabbed the assailant’s hand and pushed the gun away
from his face. He believes three shots were fired. The first shot broke the windscreen of
Mr. St. Bernard's car, the second shot hit the wall of the drive through and the third shot
hit the fast-food service attendant. Mr. St. Bernard pushed his car door open, pinning the
assailant between his car and the service window and apparently, the gun fell to the
ground and was kicked under the vehicle. He then dealt the masked person several blows
to the head, chin, neck and shoulder. The assailant slumped to the ground and Mr. St.
Bernard knelt on his back with his arms pinned behind him until the police arrived at the
scene. The officers called the ambitlance service EHS which took the suspect and the fast-
food service attendant to the St. Agnes Emergency Facility in Port-of-Spain.
PC Bailey accompanied the assailant, known to the police as Peter “Chappa” Alvarez of
no fixed address, to the St. Agnes Emergen: y Facility. He has been warded, in an unstable
condition, under police guard. The medical personnel in attendance have expressed
concern that several of Mr. Alvarez’s injucies appear life-threatening. The service
attendant, Mrs Laila Vernova, was also warded as she had suffered considerable loss of
blood. Mr. St. Bernard declined medical attention as he had no serious injuries. The main
eyewitness, Mr. Nazmoon Khan, was also interviewed and a statement taken from him.
Further investigations revealed that this was the third incident of robbery with violence
at this location for the period April 1st to July 7 2020. In addition, there has been one
homicide which appeared to be incidental to a similar attempt at robbery where the
victim had resisted the assault. The homicide victim was a nineteen-year old male gas
station attendant who was exiting the convenience store on the compound.
The gas station and fast-food attendants report that, in recent times, there has been an
increase in the number of persons congregating on the compound near the exits. Persons
have been observed consuming alcoholic drinks and smoking what appears to be, from
its fumes, marijuana.’

END

6|Page
