.2013 PO:ILICE PROMOTION (MAIN) EXAMINATION 
TO THE RANI{ OF CORPORAL 
DATE 15T JUNE, 2013 
SUBJECT LAW 
TIME 2YzHOURS 
INSTRUCTIONS:. 
THIS PAPER CONTAINS FOURTEEN (14) QUESTIONS, CANDIDATES ARE 
REQUIRED TO ANSWER ANY TEN (10) QUESTIO NS. 
NB. QUESTIONS ANSWERED IN EXCESS OF TEN WILL NOT BE ASSESSED 
TIDS EXAMINATION IS WORTH 100 MARKS. 
THE PASS MARJ( IS 50%,. 
YOU ARE REM J[NDED OF THE NEED TO USE PROPER DICTION, CORRECT 
SPELLING, STANDARD GRAMMAR AND AN ORDERLY, LEGIBLE AND NEAT 
PRESENTATION OF YOUR WORK. 
WRITE YOUR EXAMINAT ION NUMBER ON THE COVER OF THE 
EXAMINAT ION BOOKLET AND AT THE TOP OF EVERY PAGE THROUGHOUT 
THE BOOKLET. 
DO NOT WRITE YOUR NAME AND REGIMENTAL NUMBER IN RESPONSE 
TO ANY QUESTIONS 



1. You have been given instructions to prosecu te an offender for the offence of assault by beating. 
(a) List seven (7) things that must be included in the complaint. 
I (7 marks) 
(b) Name th ree (3) inchoate offences. (3 marks) 
2. Define any five (5) of the following legal terms. 
(a) Ab Initio; 
(b) Chattel; 
(c) Examination in Chief; 
(d) igno rantia juris non ex cusat; 
(e) Intra vires; or 
(f) Rebuttable presumption. (10 mark s) 
3. 'A' entered a g,rocery and purchased some items to the value of $325.00 for which he paid in cash 
before leaving. The secur ity officer at the grocery observed that the cashier, who was a full time 
employee, put tpe money into her purse instead of the cash register. 
You are requir ed to give brief reasons for you r answers to parts (a) and (b) below. 
(a) What offence, if any, did the cashier comm it? (6 marks) 
(b) Explain if your answer would have been any different if she had placed the money into the cash 
register and then taken it from there. (4 marks) 
4. Where a vehicle is parked on a road in contravention of any of the provisions of the Motor Veh icle 
and Road Traffic Act Chapter 48:50 ("the Act") , or is left in any road in such a manner that it is likely 
to cause an obstruction to persons lawfully using any such road, Section 108 (1) of the Act provides 
two actions that a police officer may take. 
5. 
State the two (2} actions that may be taken in accordance with Section 108 (1) of the Act. 
(a) 
(10 marks) 
In a trial for murder where the accused raises the defence of provocation, the court must be 
satisfied that the accused has satisfied a two stage test in order for the defen ce to be applicable . 
Briefly explain the two -stage test. 
(6 marks) 
(b) A suspeet has made a written statement. Having read it, the suspect refuses to write the 
presc ribe d certificate at the end of the statement or to sign it. 
What are the requirements of Rule (m) (f) of the Judges' Rules in such circumstances? 
(4 marks) 
1 



6. 
7. 
(a) State four (4) e ceptions to the rule against the "admissibility of hearsay evidenc e". 
(4 marks) 
(b) Section 127 of the Swnmary Courts Act Chapter 4:20 provides for the admissibility of the 
report of a Medical Examiner at the hearing of a summary offence in certain circumstances. 
However, sub-s~ctio n (2) of the said s,ection states that the medical report shall not be admitted 
as evidence w1der sub-section (1) in two (2) circumstances. 
(a) 
Name them. 
The admissibility of evidence at court embrace s what is known as the 'Best 
Evidence Rule' . 
Nan1e four ( 4) circwnstances under which secondary evidence may be admitted. 
(6 marks) 
(8 marks) 
(b) Where a defendant fails to appear in court on the date of his case, Section 44 of the Summary 
Offences Act Chapter 4:20 provides that a magistrate may do one of three things, one of which 
is that the magistrate may issue a warrant for the defendant. 
Name the other options available to a magistrate in such a circumstance. 
(2 marks) 
8. One day a man visited a lady's home to deliver an item of furnitme that she had purchased from his 
employer the previous day. Whilst there, he secretly made an impression of her house key on a bar of 
soap. Later that evening he fashioned a key from the mould on the bar of soap. At around 7:30 pm that 
evening he parked his vehicle just outside of the lady's home and sat in his·car paying surveillanc e to 
the residence . About one hour later, he observed the lady enter her vehicle and she drove away. He 
quickly exited his car and used the key that he had made earlier to open the front door. Having gotten 
inside, he packed items of jewellery and cash that he found in one of her bedroom drawers into a 
pillow case. He then took from his pocket the Jack of Diamonds from a ~eck of playing cards and 
placed it on the centre of her dining table. He also took a beverage from her refrigerator and left using 
his key to lock the door behind him. On her return home the lady realized that there had been an 
intruder and she called the police. Based on the home security system the lady had in place the 
investigators were able to quickly t race and apprehend the man and recover the goods. 
What breaking offence, if any, did the man commit? 
Discuss fully stating the applicable law with appropriate analysis in your answer. 
(10 maries) 
9. Whilst on duty one day, a lady visited the station and reported that she is in the business of tension 
relief management, which entails the provision of sexual services to clients in need of relief. The lady 
stated that about one month ago she provided her services to a male client who paid her by way of a 
cheque. Upon deposit ing the cheque into her bank accotmt, it returned to l;J.er three days late r with a 
notation that the payment was dishonoured due to insufficient funds in the account. The lady 
explained that she took steps to formally inform the man that the cheque had been dishonomed, but 
she had been unable to get him to settle the matter. She now desires police intervention in the matter. 
Discuss fully whether the man can be prosecuted for any offence in relation to the issuing of the 
cheque. 
(10 marks) 
2 



10. 'T', a notorious drug dealer drove his cousin to the airport and was in the lobby awaiting whilst his 
cousin was checking-in. Having noticed that the line was a bit long he decided to relieve himself in the 
men's room. Ho'wever, on his way to the facility a police officer recognized him and alerted his 
colleagues on duty at the airport. The officers challenged T in the restroom and upon searching him 
found 250 grams of opium in a bag in one of his pants pockets. The officers then took T to the police 
station nearby. A discussion then commenced on the appropriate charge that should be laid on T . 
Officer A said that the offence was a straight possession of the narcotic. Officer B advanced that the 
offence was one of possession for the purpose of trafficking due to weight. Whilst Officer C submitted 
that where a person was found with a dangerou s drug in his possession in or within 500 meters of an 
airport it was presumed such person intended to export the dangerous drug, regardless of the weight. 
State with reasons, which of the officers has made the correct determination on the offence committed. 
Your answer should also discuss the reasons for your disagreement with the offences suggested by the 
other two officers. 
(10 marks) 
11. One day a retired police officer was walking along the street when she became suspicious of a man 
who walked briskly past her with a laptop computer in his hand. Within seconds of their paths 
crossing, the retired officer heard a voice shouting "thief, thief!" She immediately turned and called on 
the man who had just passed her to stop. He fled the scene and she gave chase. Whilst he was running, 
the man threw the laptop computer into some bushes but continued attempting to escape. The retired 
officer eventually caught up with him, subdued him and took him to the police station. When the 
Senior Sentry heard the facts of the matter, he told the retired police officer that she should have 
remembered that she was no longer vested with the powers of arrest unless an offence was committed 
in her view, but he had a strategy to legitimize the occurrence. He then instructed the junior officers to 
release the man, and told them to allow him to walk a few feet on the pavement, and then lawfully 
arrest him based on the report that had just been made. 
Discuss fully the appropriateness of the action taken by the Senior Sentry at the station. 
(10 marks) 
12. One evening whilst at a diner, a young lady <?Onfided in her friend that she had been having trouble to 
sleep properly, and had also been going through what she considered to be a streak of bad luck. She 
then narrated a series of mishaps that she had recently experienced and said that she felt that she 
needed a blessing. Unknown to the friends, D who was seated at a table next to them had been 
carefully listening to the conversation. The next day D approached the young lady whilst she was 
waiting to get a taxi and asked whether he could tell her something. She agreed, whereupon he told her 
that he had a gift of healing and he had sensed that she had enemies that were jealous of her. He added 
that her enemies had done something to mal<e her life miserable, and asked her whether she had been 
going through reeent bad luck. She immediately said yes and asked him what could be done . He said 
that he could remove the curse by a procedure but that she had to be strong and willing. D then took 
her to an abandoned house and caused her to remove all her clothing on the basis that they were 
contaminated. He then spent a few minutes voicing some words that were unintelligible to her. D then 
removed his clothes saying that someone had placed a carnal spirit upon her but he had dealt with that 
before. He told her to close her eyes repeat the word "Hallelujah", and he would thrust the spirit out of 
her through an act of sexual intercourse as it was the only way. He then proceeded with the ritual as 
she repeated the word "Hallelujah". When D was finished, he told her that she should lie quietly for 
two hours before leaving for her home. He warned her that she should keep the matter secret otherwise 
the procedure would backfire. Later that night she felt compelled to confide in someone and related 
the incident to her best friend. On hearing this, her friend took her to the police station for advice on 
the matter, as she was uncomfortable with the fact that her friend had engaged in sexual intercourse 
with a stranger. 
For what offence, if any, can D be prosecuted? 
Discuss fully stating the applicable law with appropriate analysis in your answer. (10 marks) 
3 



13. A mother was called to the office of the principal at the school where her nine year old daughter was a 
student. The principal explained to the mother that on numerous occasions, teachers had to retrieve 
items from her daughter which the girl had taken from the schoolbags of other students . The principal 
advised her that she s~10t1ld do something about the habit her daughter appeared to be deve loping, as 
continued activity of the sort, may result in expulsion from the school. The mother became distrau ght 
and decided that in order to prevent her daughter from developing dishonest tendencie s; she would 
have to pretend as though she had lost control of herself and do something drastic to scare her 
daughter, so that the child would take her warning seriously. The next day she visited one of her 
friends who breeds snakes as pets, and obtained from him some of his non-poisonous snakes. Later 
that evening, she placed the snakes into a barrel and held her daughter over the barrel. She told the 
child that if she did not pledge that she would stop stealing from persons, she would be dropped into 
the barrel of snalces. The child cried and swore that she would never steal again, as she desperately 
tried to raise her feet from being near to the snakes. A neighbour who had been peering through the 
curtain s of the woman's house thought that the mother was about to murder the child and dump her 
body into the barrel. He called the police and made a report. When the officers arrived the mother told 
them that her neighbor was a meddlesome character, and she told them exactly what had occurred and 
assured them that the child was never in any real danger. The neighbor in the meantime, was busy 
urging the officers to charge the mother for attempted murder, as he was an eye witness to the 
incident. 
Discuss fully whether the woman can be prosecuted for any criminal offence. You are to state the 
applicable law with appropriate analysis in your answer. 
(10 marks) 
14. One evening V and a group of friends were socializing when one of them recounted an. incident that 
had occurred at his place of employment. He related that while at work at the bank one day, a man 
entered and handed one of the customer service representatives ("CSR") a note threatening to kill him 
if he did not hand over all his cash. He added that the CSR got so scared that he fainted. The 
unexpected reaction caused the thief to become confused and he ran out of the bank empty handed. 
The friends shared a hearty laugh over the incident. About two months later, V and his girlfriend were 
on their way home from an evening at the gymnasitlm when a masked man suddenly appeared in front 
of them out of the darkness. The man told V to hand over all his money or he would rape the young 
woman. The unexpected presence of the man startled V and he fainted. The thief stoo ped over the 
unconscious body .of V, and relieved him of the cash in his wallet and a chain with pendant that V was 
wearing around his neck The thief then told v•s girlfriend to stay put, and he calmly walk ed away as 
he realized that V was not in any position to raise an alarm. The thief did not take anything from V's 
girlfriend. 
State what offence, if any, was committed. 
Discuss fully stating the applicable law with appropriate analysis in your answer . 
(10 marks) 
END 
4 