‘ ‘ (3 7 ,
2019 POLICE PROMOTION (MAIN) EXAMINATION
TO THE RANK OF SERGEANT
SUBJECT : LAW
DATE : 13th JULY, 2019
TIME ALLOWED : 2% HOURS
INSTRUCTIONS:
THIS PAPER CONTAINS TWELVE (12) QUESTIONS. CANDIDATES ARE
REQUIRED TO ANSWER ANY TEN (10) QUESTIONS EACH OF WHICH WILL
CARRY TEN (10) MARKS.
NB:- QUESTIONS ANSWERED IN EXCESS OF TEN WILL NOT BE
CORRECTED.
THE EXAMINATION IS WORTH 100 MARKS.
THE PASS MARK IS 50%
YOU ARE REMINDED OF THE NEED TO USE PROPER DICTION, CORRECT
SPELLING, STANDARD GRAMMAR AND AN ORDERLY, LEGIBLE AND NEAT
PRESENTATION OF YOUR WORK.
WRITE YOUR EXAMINATION NUMBER ON THE COVER OF THE
EXAMINATION ANSWER BOOKLET AND ON THE TOP OF EVERY PAGE
THROUGHOUT THE BOOKLET.
DO NOT WRITE YOUR NAME AND REGIMENTAL NUMBER _ IN
RESPONSE TO ANY QUESTION


--- page break ---

SECTION A
am (a) State six (6) functions in the law that may be performed bya
Justice of the Peace as it relates to the criminal law. (6 marks)
(b) I[lustrate by way of a table four (4) differences between a
“preliminary inquiry” and a “trial” at the Magistrates’ Courts. (4 marks)
2: (a) A police officer while giving evidence upon oath said that he
heard Candace shouting to John saying “John, boy your shop
on fire and you leaving.” Candace was never found to get a
statement from her. State with a brief reason whether the
court can admit this evidence at the trial. (5 marks)
(b) Section 15C (1) of the Evidence Act, Chapter 7:02 lists six (6)
circumstances under which the court, where satisfied, is
empowered to admit in criminal proceedings, a statement
that was made by a person in a document, as evidence of any
fact of which direct oral evidence by such person would be
admissible in the proceedings.
List any five (5) of them. (5 marks)
a (a) Section 3 (b) of the Larceny Act, Chapter 11:12 defines the
meaning of the expression ‘takes’ as including the obtaining
of possession of the item stolen by either of four (4) means.
Name them. (4 marks)
(b) A man who was employed as a part time clerk with a soft
drink company, was also permitted to deliver goods and
accept payments from customers on behalf of his employer
during the hours he was not required for desk duty. The
payments received were required to be remitted to the
company within forty-eight hours of collection from the
customer. He was paid on a commission basis and was free
to work the hours that he felt he could make the most sales.
One day the salesman collected payments amounting to
$11,000.00 from customers in relation the goods he sold. He
subsequently remitted to the company the sum of $5,000.00
and kept the balance for himself. The shortage was
discovered and a report was made at your station.
What offence, if any, did the employee commit? Give a brief
reason for your answer. (6 marks)
4, (a) Define the doctrine of ‘recent possession’ inthe criminal Law (4 marks)
(b) State the four (4) essential elements to establish the offence
of receiving stolen property. (4 marks)
(c) Y left his bag in a locker at the gymnasium. Whilst Y was
exercising, D removed a mobile phone from his bag and


--- page break ---

went away. X saw D’s conduct and reported him to the
police who arrested D. State two (2) defenses D may advance
to avoid being prosecuted for the offence of larceny. (2 marks)
5. (a) Section 4 (1) (a) of the Children Act, Chapter 46:01 lists a
number of ways in which a person may commit the offence
of cruelty against a child.
State any five (5) of them. (5 marks)
(b) In accordance with Section 3(1) of the Children Act, Chapter
46:01, explain the two (2) ways in which the act of
“penetration of a child” may take place. (5 marks)
6. (a) The actus reus of a crime consists of both acts and omissions.
State five (5) circumstances under which a person may be
found liable by omission (5 marks)
y
(b) Explain what is meant by the phrase ‘coincidence of the actus
reus and the mens rea’ in the criminal law. (5 marks)
SECTION B
7. Remington, who is a hunter suffered an injury to his arm during
a hunting expedition towards the end of January, 2019. During
the last week of March, 2019 while watching the local news on
television, Remington realized that the deadline for the renewal
of his firearm permit was almost upon him. The following
afternoon Remington’s cousin Colt paid him a social visit.
Remington told Colt that he had to get his firearm permit
renewed, but he has always encountered difficulties to get a
parking spot, and with the recent hot weather coupled with
Saharan dust, he was hoping that the time will be extended. Colt
told him that he need not worry, since he- Colt, could take care of
it for him as a serving police officer. The next morning Colt went
to the district police station with Remington’s shotgun and the
corresponding permit to pay the requisite fee. While examining
the permit the police sergeant noticed that the photograph on the
permit was not in the likeness of the man before him. His facial
expression immediately changed and Colt realized that the
sergeant was about to say something to him. With a smile on his
face Colt said ‘Doh get no horrors Sarge, | am a police officer too, and
well yuh know we exempted’. Colt is in fact a member of the police
service with a very good conduct record.
Discuss fully whether Remington can be prosecuted for any
offence under the firearms legislation. In your answer, you are
required to state the applicable law, and produce the appropriate
analysis based on the stated facts, in support of your answer. (10 marks)


--- page break ---

8. Dee went into an electronics store to see whether she could find
the newest model of her favourite brand of mobile phones. She
planned to steal if she could. She found the mobile phone that she
was looking for, and removed it from the shelf. She was about to
conceal it in her coat pocket, but noticed a little boy looking at
her, so she placed it back on the shelf and exited the store. While
walking in the street Dee noticed a valuable camera on the back
seat of a parked car that had its window half way down. She
recognized that the car belonged to Sleazy who had recently been
prosecuted for distributing child pornography. She despised the
activity that Sleazy was accused of so she reached through the
window and took the camera, as she believed that he would be
using it to take pornographic pictures of children. Dee threw the
camera into a large drain on her way home.

Discuss fully whether Dee can be prosecuted for any offence
under the Larceny Act. In your answer, you are required to state
the applicable law, and produce the appropriate analysis based
on the stated facts, in support of your answer. (10 marks)
9. Squirrel returned to Trinidad and Tobago a few months ago
having been deported from a foreign country. He had served a
prison sentence having been convicted on a series of auto thefts
and robberies. Since his return, Squirrel had been avoiding
tempting opportunities, and had been performing odd jobs to
earn wages. He managed to accumulate sufficient funds to
purchase tickets for his girlfriend and himself to attend a concert
on Easter Sunday that featured a legendary vocal artiste. On the
afternoon of the concert, Squirrel dressed and left his home to
meet his girlfriend. However, he had difficulty in getting a taxi
to take him to the concert. After waiting for a few minutes, he
became increasingly frustrated. Squirrel decided to employ his
skills just one more time to get to his destination. He picked the
lock ona car that was parked on the roadway, jump-started it and
drove to concert venue where hemet his girlfriend. When she
inquired about the car, he told her that his friend had loaned it to
him and he just had to leave it parked around the corner by a co-
worker of his friend. Squirrel drove the car a block away and left
it abandoned on a side street. He attended the concert with his
girlfriend, and went home later that night. During this time, the
owner of the vehicle had discovered it missing and reported that
he had secured his vehicle and had given no one the consent to
take it away. The following day, police investigators located the
abandoned vehicle.
What offence, if any, did Squirrel commit? In your answer, you
are required to state the applicable law in terms of the elements
to the offence, and produce the appropriate analysis based the
given facts (10 marks)
10. Louse had been dating Jeanie for the past three years. Eight
months ago, when Louse realized that Jeanie seemed to be losing
interest in him, he hurriedly purchased an engagement ring for
her, and soon after they got engaged to be married in June, 2020.
About three months ago, Jeanie broke off the relationship telling


--- page break ---

Louse that she was having an affair with his best friend Snake
Eye, and that he Louse, should not be visiting her home anymore.
Louse became deeply depressed, and blamed himself for the
break-up of his relationship with Jeanie. He was still so much in
love with her, that two evenings ago, around 7.00 pm he decided
to go to Jeanie’s house to see if he could find a keepsake for
sentimental reasons. Although the house was locked, Louse
gained entry by using a spare key, which Jeanie had previously
told him she kept in a flower pot just outside the front door. As
he looked around the house, he saw the engagement ring that he
had given her on a counter. He concluded that since he had
purchased the ring, he was entitled to reclaim it since Jeanie had
broken their marriage agreement. He then wrote a note with the
words ‘I will always love you’ on a sheet of Paper, affixed it to the
mirror on her dresser table with a piece of sticking tape, and left.
Jeanie arrived home later that night in company with Snake Eye,
and discovered what took place. Encouraged by Snake Eye,
Jeanie visited the police station and made a complaint, and
demanded that Louse be prosecuted for any offence possible.
Discuss fully whether Louse can be prosecuted for any offence
under the Larceny Act. In your answer, you are required to state
the applicable law, and produce the appropriate analysis based
on the stated facts, in support of your answer. (10 marks)
11. Kermit and Peggy met at a party a few months ago. They
exchanged contact information, kept in touch and eventually
started dating and soon began a romantic relationship. They were
so comfortable with each other, that they committed themselves
to each other and started to engage in sexual intercourse. The both
felt that they were the perfect match for each other, and agreed
that it was time that they take more serious steps to commitment.
One night, Peggy invited Kermit to the home of her parents for
them to get to know the man she wanted to marry. They had a
wonderful time that night, and Peggy felt happy when she saw
her father and Kermit talking together in private. Later that night
Peggy’s father revealed to both Peggy and her mother, that
Kermit was his son from an extra marital relationship and begged
Peggy’s forgiveness. Peggy remarked that she always felt that
there was something special between Kermit and _ herself.
However, Peggy’s mother became furious and the following day
she made a report to the police asking that Kermit be prosecuted
for the offence of incest as he was the elder of the two.
Discuss fully whether Kermit or Peggy can be prosecuted for the
offence of incest under the sexual offences legislation. In your
answer, you are required to state the applicable law, and produce
the appropriate analysis based on the stated facts. (10 marks)
12. One day a movie crew was filming a scene for a superhero movie
called Fearless Wong. At the time, the cast was acting out a scene
in which the two police officers were engaged in a confrontation
with Fearless Wong, who wore a mask hiding his face. In-keeping
with the script, Fearless Wong skillfully and playfully disarmed
the officers, and turned to leave the scene. At that moment,


--- page break ---

(eneeenmmmmemeeee
|
Smiley who is a licensed firearm holder, saw the fight scene in
| which the police officers had been disarmed. Smiley immediately
rushed to the assistance of the men. He drew his licensed firearm
and called upon Fearless Wong to stop. Believing that the movie
| director madea change to the script, Fearless Wong decided to go
with the flow and improvise. With a big smile on his face, he
looked at Smiley and shouted ‘No one can stop me, I am the Fearless
| Wong!’ He then turned and started to climb a wire fence to leave
the scene. While saying the words ‘one shot, one stop’, Smiley then
discharged his firearm at Fearless Wong and the bullet caught
| him in his left hip. The following day Fearless Wong died at the |
| hospital, as his body did not respond positively to the treatment |
| for the wound he sustained. The members of the movie crew
want Smiley prosecuted. Smiley however, is saying that he was |
only defending persons whom he thought were policemen, and
he did not want their prisoner to escape. |
|
Discuss fully whether Smiley can be prosecuted for any
homicide offence. In your answer, you are required to state the
applicable law, and produce the appropriate analysis based on
| the stated facts, in support of your answer. (10 marks) |
|
|
| |
| END
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
| }
|
|
| |
|
|
|
|
