|
|
|
| 2019 POLICE PROMOTION (MAIN) EXAMINATION |
| TO THE RANK OF CORPORAL |
!
| SUBJECT : LAW |
. |
| DATE : 8th JUNE, 2019 |
| TIME ALLOWED : 2%HOURS
|
oo , OO
|
| INSTRUCTIONS: !
i
| THIS PAPER CONTAINS FOURTEEN (14) QUESTIONS. CANDIDATES ARE
| REQUIRED TO ANSWER ANY TEN (10) QUESTIONS EACH OF WHICH WILL |
| CARRY TEN (10) MARKS. |
| |
| NB:-_ QUESTIONS ANSWERED IN EXCESS OF TEN WILL NOT BE |
| CORRECTED. |
THE EXAMINATION IS WORTH 100 MARKS.
|
| THE PASS MARK IS 50% - |
‘y |
YOU ARE REMINDED OF THE NEED TO USE PROPER DICTION, CORRECT
SPELLING, STANDARD GRAMMAR AND AN ORDERLY, LEGIBLE AND NEAT
PRESENTATION OF YOUR WORK.
- |
WRITE YOUR EXAMINATION NUMBER ON THE COVER OF THE
| EXAMINATION ANSWER BOOKLET AND ON THE TOP OF EVERY PAGE |
| THROUGHOUT THE BOOKLET. |
ry . q
DO NOT WRITE YOUR NAME AND REGIMENTAL NUMBER_IN |
RESPONSE TO ANY QUESTION
i
| :


--- page break ---

SECTION A
4 1. (a) Describe four (4) features that distinguish a crime from a tort. (8 marks)
;
(b) Name two (2) sources from which the criminal law is derived. (2 marks)
;
> In the case of R v Turnbull (1976) the court laid down eight (8)
( important guidelines with respect to identification evidence.
4
| State and briefly explain any five (5) of these guidelines. (10 marks)
l
3. (a) With reference to the elements of a crime, explain the legal
operation of the Doctrine of Transferred Malice. (4 marks)
; (b) State whether the Doctrine of Transferred Malice can be applied
to prosecute D in the following scenarios, and give a brief reason
for your answer:-
| (i) D placed a venomous snake under his wife’s car seat,
y intending that she will be fatally bitten on her way to work
the next morning. However, during the night a thief stole the
1 car and was fatally bitten by the snake instead. (3 marks)
i
; (ii) Ina fit of rage, D threw a stone at V's car window intending
| to smash it and scare him. However, his aim was off target
and the stone came into contact with V’s face. (3 marks)
4. (a) “A”, "B" and "C" are charged jointly with the murder of "D",
However, "C" is now repentant and wishes to give evidence for
the Prosecution.
State the three (3) measures that must be adopted by the
prosecution to ensure the admissibility of "C's evidence. (6 marks)
b) State four (4) classes of persons who may be considered
f Pp y
j incompetent to give evidence in a court of law. (4 marks)
i
5. State the five (5) conditions, which must be satisfied before a Dying
fi Declaration, may be admitted in evidence in a court of law. (10 marks)
i
6. (a) Section 5 (1) of the Dangerous Drugs Act Chapter 11:25 provides
| that a person who has possession of a dangerous drug commits an
i offence. Name five exceptions provided under Section 5 (2) of the
} Act to thi hibiti (5 marks)
f ct to this prohibition.
k
4
| (b) Section 3 (1) of the Act lists a number of ways in which a drug
trafficking offence may be committed. State any five (5) of them. (5 marks)
7. (a) You have completed preliminary investigations into a house
breaking offence in which a fifteen-year-old female student has
H been implicated as a suspect. You have been instructed by your
ft
|


--- page break ---

supervisor to interview the student on the matter. :
In accordance with clause 4 at Appendix B of the Judges’ Rules,
state fully the procedure that you are required to follow to
conduct an interview with the student. (5 marks)
(b) Having recorded a statement from the student, state correctly the :
words of the certificate that you are required to ask her to
transcribe at the end of the statement, in accordance with Rule V
(e) of the Judges’ Rules. (5 marks |
SECTION B |
:
|
8. John wanted to buy a can of soda from a vending machine. He then |
realized that he forgot his wallet with his money at home. He took a 4
receipt that he had in his pocket and folded it to the size of a $5.00 bill.
He inserted the folded receipt into the machine, and the machine |
delivered the selected can of soda into the dispensing receptacle. He |
looked around to ascertain whether anyone had seen what he had |
done, and saw that no one had seen him. As he leaned forward to take |
the can, he regretted his action and walked away without the can of
soda. However, Misty, the proprietor of the vending machine had seen
everything and had already summoned the police. John was
apprehended a short distance away. He was later charged with the |
offence of larceny of the can of soda.
H
h
Discuss fully the chances of John being convicted for this offence. You
are required to state the applicable law with appropriate analysis of the
elements to the offence in your answer. (10 marks)
9. One afternoon, two police officers were on foot patrol duty, when they
observed a man sitting upon a concrete fence rolling what appeared to ;
- 7 be marijuana cigarettes. The police officers challenged the man and
told him of their suspicion. He replied ‘is no scene officers, 1 living right
here. Is only a small amount I have for personal use, in-keeping with the new |
moratorium for small amounts of marijuana. So me eh committing no offence
to get case.’ When the officers checked the amount of marijuana that the
- man had, it was indeed found to weigh less than ten grams.
Discuss fully whether the man can be prosecuted for any criminal
offence. You are required to state the applicable law with appropriate
analysis of the elements of the offence. (10 marks)
10. MENACE is well known to the police as a violent criminal and gang
member. He has several court matters pending and is currently out on
bail. The only person who has him in high regard is his mother, who |
often makes excuses and says that society misunderstands her son. In
fact, he is very kind to his mother. One day while Menace was driving
his mother to the hairdresser, a rival gang intercepted his car and
dragged him out of it. The men delivered a vicious beating upon
Menace with pieces of iron and only fled the scene when they heard
the sound of approaching police sirens. The severity of the beating left ;
Menace brain dead and he had to be placed on a life support system.
}


--- page break ---

Hl
| Despite his mother’s prayers he remained in a vegetated state for |
i months, and one day she overheard the medical staff saying that he
will not come off that artificial life. The mother made a decision to trust
in her religious belief. One day while at the hospital, she sat and prayed
\ , in silence and ended by voicing the words ‘Father, your will be done. Let |
h nature take its course’. With that, she disconnected Menace from the life
support system. Menace passed away a few minutes later. |
Discuss whether the mother can be prosecuted and convicted for any |
H homicide offence. Explain fully the reasons for your answer. You are
i required to state the applicable law with appropriate analysis of the |
elements of the offence in your answer. (10 marks)
11. One day WPC Alert was on her way home having completed her tour
I of duty. While walking, she noticed D with whom she was familiar, at
Hy the steering wheel of a motor vehicle that was stopped at a red light. !
i WPC Alert had an outstanding warrant for his arrest at the police
| station. She approached the vehicle and called out to him. As he looked |
fi in her direction, she told him that she had a warrant for his arrest. Upon
i hearing this, D accelerated and fled the scene. WPC Alert called for
i assistance and a nearby patrol car intercepted D and conveyed him to
4! the police station where the outstanding warrant was executed on him.
\ D was also charged with the offence of escaping lawful custody.
i Discuss fully the chances of a successful conviction for this offence.
i You are required to state the applicable law with appropriate analysis |
| of the elements of the offence in your answer. (10 marks)
| |
i 12. T who had just been released from prison after serving a term for a :
i) series of burglaries, was walking past a church in your district. T
i noticed that two boys had just forced open the back door of the church.
i When the boys saw T looking at them, they ran away. T then entered
i through the said back door that had been forced open and conducted
\ a search inside. After looking around, he removed from the altar a bible
and a crucifix valued $5,000.00, and left with them via his point of |
| entry. A report was lodged at your station and the matter was
H investigated, and the above facts were discovered. T was arrested and
i the investigator is desirous of prosecuting him for an offence.
State correctly the offence that T committed? Explain fully the reasons |
i for your answer. You are required to state the applicable law with |
| appropriate analysis of the elements of the offence in your answer. (10 marks)
13. Morrisa Pom-Pom was not the most popular young woman in the
i district where she lived. Despite the fact that she came from a wealthy
i family, she was often the victim of verbal abuse over her facial
4 appearance and clothing. One day Tommy Tootheimer made a bet with
H his friend Eric Gurlzman that he could get Pom-Pom to fall in love with |
} him, and shower him with lavish gifts. Eight weeks later, Tootheimer
and Pom-Pom appeared to be inseparable, and a very happy couple. |
4 During this time, in order to demonstrate her affection, Pom-Pom
| added him a joint holder on her credit card account intending that he |
would feel a sense of independence. One afternoon while they were |
sitting together, Pom-Pom accepted Tootheimer’s proposal for
)
t


--- page break ---

marriage, and they immediately began making plans. One day, Pom-
Pom saw Tootheimer speaking with Gurlzman and some of his other
friends. Making sure that she was not noticed, she worked her way |
close to them hoping to surprise him with the keys for a new Sub Urban |
Vehicle (SUV), that she had purchased for him. She then overheard
Tootheimer and his friends laughing and discussing the manner in
which the bet was proceeding. She then heard when Tootheimer made
a remark about her saying that she has a face that only a mother could
love. Thereafter, the crowd burst out in laughter. Pom-Pom left unseen !
and waited at her apartment for Tootheimer’s arrival. He arrived about
three hours later and approached her saying ‘Hi sweetheart’. He was
then greeted by the sound of gunfire as Pom-Pom fatally shot him five
times about his body. At her trial, Pom-Pom seeks to rely on the
defence of provocation.
Discuss the chances of Pom-Pom being successful with this defence. ,
You are required to state the applicable elements to the defence and |
produce the appropriate analysis with the stated facts in your answer. (10 marks) )
|
14. Cosmo and Drago are both aged eighteen. They are frequently engaged
in challenges involving skill or strength as a means of satisfying their
competitive thirst. The prize is usually bragging rights among their
peers, and the hope of impressing the young ladies in the district.
Recently, they came up with a new challenge which they called ‘Game
of Stones’. The idea was that they will each alternate turns lying on the
ground, while dropping increasing larger sized rocks on the other's )
mid-section to determine which of them could withstand the greater
pain. The winner will hold the title ‘Man of Steel’. Last week while |
performing their latest challenge, Drago dropped a very large rock on
Cosmo’s chest. The impact caused Cosmo to suffer three broken ribs ,
and internal bleeding, for which he had to be hospitalized. Upon
Cosmo’s parents learning what had taken place, they are insisting that
Drago be prosecuted for a wounding offence. Drago’s parents
however, are submitting that their son cannot be prosecuted for any
offence, and have raised the issue of consent.
In light of the defence raised by Drago’s parents, discuss whether the
police can successfully prosecute him for a wounding offence? You are
required to produce the appropriate analysis based on the stated facts (10 marks)
in your answer.
END


--- page break ---

