2008 POUII PROMOTION 01A00 EWIINIDON 
TO THE BINI OF SEH6EINT 
SUBJECT: LAW 
DATE: Saturday 23rd August 2008 
TIME ALLOWED: 2Yz Hours 
INSTRUCTIONS: 
THIS PAPER CONTA INS FOURTEEN (14) QUESTIONS, CANDIDATES ARE 
REQUIRED TO ANSWE R ANY TEN (10) QUESTIONS. 
NB. WHERE MORE THAN TEN (10) QUESTIONS ARE ANSWERED, ONLY THE 
FIRST TEN (10) WILL BE ASSESSED 
THE PASS MARK FOR THIS EXAMINAT ION IS FIFTY {50) MARKS. 
1. (a) A constable informs you that a man whom he has charged for an offence has refused 
to submit to having his fingerprints and photograph taken. Advise the constable on 
what action he can take, if any. (4 marks ) 
(b) State the means by which a person may be brought before the court to answer a 
criminal charge. (6 marks) 
2. (a) You are the investigator in offences where the alleged offenders are children of 
school age and young persons. How would you interview and record statements 
from them at: 
(i) school (5 marks ) 
(ii) home (5 marks ) 
3. The case of R v Turnbull sets out a number of rules or guidelines in relation to the 
admiss ibility of identification evidence . 
State any five (5) of these rules/guidelines. (10 marks ) 
4. A person who takes or uses a vehicle without the consent of the owner is generally guilty 
of an offence. However Section 74 (l)(b) of the Motor Vehicle & Road Traffic Act 
Chap. 48:50 provides exceptions. 
State fully these exceptions . (10 marks ) 



5. 
6. 
7 
(a) Explain what is meant by "an offensive weapon in the criminal law". 
(6 marks) 
(b) A metal work schoolteacher was explaining to his students how creativity was a 
neutral concept as it could be used for good as much as bad. To demonstrate, he 
fashioned a blade with a point out of the handle of a table fork. One of the 
students later related to his mother, who is a police officer, his understanding of 
the word creativity based on the teacher's demonstration. The next day the 
teacher was arrested and charged for the offence of possession of an offensive 
weapon. 
(a) 
State briefly whether he can be convicted for this offence. (4 marks) 
State whether the following statements are true or false: 
a. All arrested persons, except in the case of lawyers, must be promptly told 
of their right to communicate with their legal advisor. 
b. All arrestable offences are also indictable offences. 
c. There is no longer any offence of attempted robbery. 
d. Since a judicial officer does not initially sign a fixed penalty ticket, a 
motorist who fails to pay the penalty is not obligated to attend court on the 
date stated for attendance in the event of non-payment. 
e. Where a defendant stands mute before the court, the position that silence 
means consent is adopted and a guilty plea is entered on his behalf. 
(10 marks) 
Define the offence of serious indecency under the Sexual Offences Act. 
(5 marks) 
(b) Define the offence of indecent assault under the Sexual Offences Act. 
(5 marks) 
8. Two gang leaders agreed that they would settle their differences with fist fights in the 
street instead of gunfire. On the night of the first fight, one of the gang members stated 
that he wanted neutral persons for the referee and the judges . The gang leaders each 
selected two of their members and dispatched them to get persons to referee, judge and 
cheer at the bouts. In pursuit of their mission, the gang members visited a nearby bar 
where they selected fifteen patrons and ordered them into a waiting van. The patrons 
were taken to the fight location where they were informed of the purpose for which they 
were brought and told that they would be taken back to the bar at the end of the fights. 
They were also told that refreshments would be provided. However , the police had 
received a tip about the intended gang fights and quickly had the area cordoned off. The 
police managed to move in on the crowd before any of the fights started and arrested 
everyone. Investigations established that the fifteen patrons from the bar were not gang 
members or willing participants in the crowd. 
Has there been the commission of any serious crime? 
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer. (lOmarks) 
2 



9. A lady comes to your station seeking advice. She relates that about two years ago she 
started to live with her male companion at her home but they were not married to each 
other. However, about four months later they stopped living together, but they continued 
to have a visiting relationship. She complains that he has been forcing himself upon her 
to have sexual relations and whenever she refuses, he makes threats to her saying "that he 
will disfigure her, since if he can't have her no· man will want her." The lady explains 
that she does not want the man to face any criminal charges, but she wants him to leave 
her alone and would like to know whether she can apply for this type of relief under the 
Domestic Violence Act. 
Advise her. 
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer. (l Omarks) 
l 0. A was smoking marijuana at an abandoned dwelling house with B and C. A party of 
police officers was on mobile patrol in the district when one of the officers received 
information that A and two other men were at an abandoned house nearby selling 
marijuana. The officers went to the mentioned house without a search warrant and 
approached it quietly. They saw that A was in fact smoking marijuana. All three men 
were arrested and cautioned. A replied, " Officers is only one joint ah weed ah smoking." 
Band C replied "Is only A who was taking ah lil pull in the weed de bosses, we doh deal 
in that but we does always watch him smoke it". All three men were taken to the station 
to be charged. On arrival at the station, you are advised by a senior officer that based on 
the facts B and C should be charged for a different offence than A. 
What offence/s, if any, were committed by A, Band C? 
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer . (10 marks ) 
11. A lottery vendor lives in an apartment in the Woodbrook area. One Friday night whilst 
out "liming" at a bar in StJames, he had a few drinks of alcohol together with a young 
woman who works at the bar. After a few rounds of drinks he invited the young woman 
to his home to have a good time and told her that it wou ld be worth her while. Unknown 
to him, the young woman had several charges pending against her for robbery offences. 
When they arrived at his home he removed his shirt and trousers and hung them over a 
chair in his bedroom. They both had more alcohol to drink and without any intimate 
activity taking place, he fell asleep on his bed. He awoke about two hours later only to 
discover that the woman had left and $2,000.00 that he had in his trousers pocket was 
missing. The man visited your station and reported the incident. 
What offence has been committed? 
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer. (lOm arks ) 
12. Within two days of a man being appointed executor of his deceased uncle's estate, he 
obtained legal possession of personal items in his capacity as executor. One of the items, 
i.e. a pistol, which he placed in his brief-case for safekeeping. About one week later, 
while travelling in a maxi taxi to work his brief-case accidentally opened and the pistol 
fell onto the floor. A police officer observed this and arrested him, as he had no licence 
for the firearm. 
What are the chances of a conviction for firearm offences if the man is charged? 
Discuss fully the reasons for you answer. (lOmarks ) 
3 
·z_ 



13. A man visited the Post Office and told an employee that he wanted to send 4 wooden 
plaques to England . He filled out some forms and handed a box with four wooden 
plaques to the employee at the Post Office . A constable who had charged the man on two 
previous occasions for narcotic offences, became suspicious when he saw the man hand 
the postal employee an envelope and heard him say 'just make sure that my package go 
today'. The constable approached the counter and asked the employee for the box that 
was given to him. Upon searching the contents, the 4 plaques were found to each 
concealed 5 grams of heroin . The employee then handed the envelope to the officer, and 
when opened it was found to contain $500 .00 cash. 
For what offence, if any, can the man be charged? 
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer. (10 marks) 
14. At around 9: 15 pm one night a lady locked the entrances to her home and retired to bed. 
About twenty minutes later she heard a noise and went to investigate. While the lady was 
at the front of the house, a young man who had been recently released on bail for 
breaking offences placed his hand under a bedroom window that was not firmly shut, and 
widened the opening in order to climb into the house and relieve the lady of some items. 
However, as he was about to climb in he realized that the householder was returning to 
her bedroom and all that he managed to do was snatch two gold chains with pendants 
from a bedside table. 
What offence, if any, did the man commit? 
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer. (lOmarks) 
End 
4 