2010 POLICE PROMOTION (MAIN) EXAMINATION TO THE
RANK OF SERGEANT
SUBJECT: LAW
DATE: 10" JULY, 2010
TIME ALLOWED: 2% HOURS
INSTRUCTIONS:
THIS PAPER CONTAINS FOURTEEN (14) QUESTIONS, CANDIDATES ARE
REQUIRED TO ANSWER ANY TEN (10) QUESTIONS.
THE PASS MARK IS 50%
N.B. WHERE MORE THAN TEN (10) QUESTIONS ARE ANSWERED, ONLY THE
FIRST TEN (10) WILL BE ASSESSED.
k. (a) Name four categories of persons who could be exempted from being a compellable witness in
a court of law. (4 marks)
(b) Define the defence of ‘duress’ in the criminal law. (4 marks)
(c) Name two offences for which the consent of the Director of Public Prosecutions must be
obtained before instituting proceedings. (2 marks)
2. (a) State the three methods which may be adopted by the state when it desires to use the evidence
of one co-accused against the others involved in a particular crime.
(6 marks)
(b) Sections 4 A and 4 B of the Offences Against the Person Act Chapter 11:08 makes provision
for two statutory partial defences available to an accused on a charge of murder.
Name them. (2 marks)
(c) Define the term ‘Principal’ under the Criminal Law. (2 marks)
1


--- page break ---

3. About ten months ago a woman in her early twenties entered into a romantic relationship with a man
in his mid-fifties and she soon moved into a lavish home that he rented for her. He made frequent
business trips and would shower her with expensive gifts on his return. About two weeks ago he
returned from a trip unexpectedly. On visiting his sweetheart, he had to wait several minutes before
she opened the door at which stage she let a man out of the house and said that he was her cousin. On
two other occasions in the days that followed he experienced the same period of waiting on his visits
to her home and observed young men, whom she later identified as her cousins, leaving the home as
he entered. About two days ago, he visited the home of his sweetheart and instead of going to the
front door he walked to the side of the house and peeked through the bedroom window and saw his
sweetheart making passionate love to one of the men that she had described as her cousin. Conscious
that he did not wish to lose her affection, he waited until the young man departed. He confronted her
with what he saw and asked that she be faithful to him. She laughed and remarked that she had a need
to get her oil changed and that he does not have the tools to fix her engine. She then chased him out of
the house telling him that he could return when he was ready to bring the money for the rent. Later
that night, he returned to the house and entered through a door that she had forgotten to close. He
went into her bedroom and set fire to the expensive clothing that he had purchased for her during their
relationship intending that only the clothing would burn. The fire got out of control and the entire
house was destroyed. During an interview with the police the man had made it clear that he never
intended to cause damage to any item other than the clothing that he had purchased.

Can the man be legally held liable for the destruction of the house? Give reasons for your answer.
(10 marks)

4. Explain the meaning of any four of the following terms under the Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic
Act Chapter 48:50:

(a) Driver
(b) Licensing Authority
(c ) Motor Vehicle
(d) Traffic
(e) Overtaking
(2 % marks each)
5. (a) Define the following terms under the sexual offences Act Chapter 11:28:
(i) Serious indecency.
(ii) Brothel.
(6 marks)
(b) Section 31 (1) of the Sexual Offences Act Chapter 11:28 provides for the mandatory reporting
of suspected sexual abuse of a minor by four categories of persons.
Name them. (4 marks)
2


--- page break ---

6. One night a lady who works as a clerk in the district court was on her way home from a group
meeting when she observed a young man removing items from a pouch in his hand and placing them
into a pocket of his trousers. The young man noticed that the lady appeared to be looking at him and
he placed the pouch behind his back as he slowly turned away from facing her direction. Despite the
dimly lit conditions she managed to recognize the young man as a defendant before the district court
on several dishonesty related charges. She immediately became suspicious of his actions in relation to
the items he had concealed in his pocket and as she walked away, telephoned 999 and reported the
matter. A patrol team that was just around the corner responded and apprehended the man. On
searching his trousers pocket, a gold chain and pendant were found. The young man was taken to the
police station where he was charged for the offence of Unlawful Possession.

What are the chances of the man being convicted for this offence on the given facts?
Give reasons for your answer. (10 marks)

7 (a) Name five essential elements required in law to establish a charge of larceny. (5 marks)
(b) Explain the elements necessary to establish the offence of larceny by mistake. (5 marks)

8. A woman had been living with her abusive husband for a number of years and despite the
encouragement of her family members to leave her husband, she remained at their home saying that
he was a good provider. They had a twelve year old son who had also been subjected to physical
abuse by his father. In fact, the woman’s husband was a wealthy man and she had become used to the
amenities at the house which was owned by him and she did not believe she could stand up to him in
an application for divorce. One day while lamenting her abusive situation with a friend, the friend
remarked that the words ‘till death do us part’ did not cater for violent husbands and she should get
out of the relationship. After viewing a movie one evening where an abusive wife poisoned her
husband with a concoction which was said to be untraceable, the woman made up her mind to end her
husband’s life to gain her freedom. She did some research on the internet and engaged the local
pharmacist in seemingly innocent conversations until she believed that she had found a way to poison
her husband and get away with it. She prepared her poisonous mixture that was both odorless and
tasteless and mixed it in a large tumbler of juice to give to her husband. Later that evening, her
husband sat at the kitchen table where the woman placed his food and the tumbler of drink that she
had prepared for him. She then retired to the sitting room with a smile on her face and sat to view a
movie. As the husband took a sip from the mug, his son entered the kitchen and appeared to be
exhausted from his private lessons. The man then gave his son the mug of juice and said “You look
like you need a cool drink more than me”. The boy consumed the entire mug of juice and his father
drank a beer instead. Later that night the boy succumbed to the poison and died. The mother was now
distraught as she never had any intention to cause harm to her son.

Discuss fully whether the woman can be convicted for any offence in relation to the death of her son,
explaining the principles of law that govern your answer. (10 marks)
3


--- page break ---

9. Early one morning a man walked into a bank, approached a female teller and handed her a note
which read “This is a hold-up. If you raise an alarm you will be sorry!” He then gave her another
piece of paper with a name and an account number written upon it and told her to bring up that
account. He then asked her how much money was in the account and she told him that the balance
was $782. 67. He then told her to give him the sum of exactly $782.67 in cash which she did.
However, the security officers at the bank had noticed the look of fright on the face of the teller
and intercepted the man as he was about to exit the bank. On checking the bank’s records it was
discovered that the man was the holder of the account from which the money had been taken.

For what offence, if any, can the man be convicted?
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer. (10marks)

10. One evening a prominent businessman visited a pub and noticed two young men sitting at a table
each consuming a mug of beer. He approached the men and asked to share the table as the place
was crowded. The men agreed and the businessman purchased a round of drinks for the table to
show his appreciation. The businessman told the men that they should all go somewhere else less
crowded where they could get to know each other. The men invited the businessman to
accompany them to their apartment where they could socialize without the background noise, to
which he accepted. At the apartment the businessman revealed that he was sexually attracted to
the men and he wanted to have sex with any one of them to which one of the men agreed. The
businessman handed the men the sum of $5,000.00 and said that he would appreciate their being
discreet. About two days later whilst at the said pub, the businessman met one of the two men
with whom he had the same sex affair. The man told him the session was a good one and that they
had the entire thing on video tape to upload on their computer. The businessman became horrified
on hearing this and immediately wrote a cheque for $20,000.00 and gave it to the man. He also
asked that the tape be handed over to him and not placed on the internet. The man refused to
hand over the tape and left. The businessman has now made a report to your station in relation to
the two sets of money that he handed over to the men.

What offence/s, if any, was/were committed by the two men?
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer. (10marks)

11. You are the Second Division Officer in charge of a station and the head of the division instructs
you to conduct lectures to junior officers at your station as a means of assisting them in their
preparation for the promotion examinations. At one of the lecture sessions an officer asks a
question that relates to the defence of ‘provocation’.

Explain in full to the officer the nature and elements of the defence of provocation in the criminal
law, and the effect on the case when the defence is pleaded successfully. (10marks)
4


--- page break ---

12. One day, a man had an altercation with a member of one of the services under the Ministry of
National Security whereupon the serviceman who at the time was holding a gun in his hand said
“If I was not in my uniform I would not take that tone from you!” The man’s gaze became
focused on the gun and he quickly walked away and told the serviceman that the incident would
be reported. A report was made and you have been detailed to investigate.

Discuss fully whether the serviceman can be prosecuted for any offence. (10marks)

13. A popular supermarket was participating in a sales promotion on shampoo products and part of
the promotion included giving samples to customers. The samples were placed in a large tub at
the entrance to an aisle and the tub had a sign posted on it which read "Samples". A young
woman, who had recently been released from prison having served a sentence for fraud offences,
heard that the supermarket had sample products for its customers. She went into the supermarket,
selected a packet of chewing gum to purchase, and on her way to the cashier, she stuffed 13
sample bottles of the shampoo into her pockets and left the supermarket after paying for the
chewing gum. An employee at the supermarket saw when she stuffed the bottles of shampoo into
her pockets and alerted the security officers. The security officers pursued the young woman and
held her a short distance away.

Can the young woman be prosecuted for any offence?
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer. (10 marks)

14. Whilst going through the possessions of his deceased cousin in the capacity of the executor of the
estate of the deceased, a man discovered a pistol along with a Firearm User’s Licence (“FUL”) in
the name of the deceased among the items secured in a chest. The executor took possession of the
pistol and the FUL and secured it at his home. Whilst in conversation with a friend who works in
the security industry, the executor’s friend advised him that the pistol should not be left at his
home unattended since it was issued for the purpose of personal protection and in such a
circumstance, he should be carrying it on his person at all times. Having received that advice, the
executor started to keep the pistol on his person at all times. About ten days after coming into
possession of the pistol the executor was standing at the roadside awaiting a taxi when a passerby
noticed a bulge at the executor’s waistline. The passerby formed the opinion that it was a firearm
and alerted nearby patrolmen. The officers challenged the executor and found the pistol secured
on his person.

What offence, if any, has been committed by the executor?
Discuss fully the reason for your answer. (10marks)
End
5


--- page break ---

