( . I 
2012 POI,.ICE PROMOTION (MAIN) EXAMINATION 
TO THE RANK OF CORPORAL 
DATE 14TH JULY, 2012 
SUBJECT LAW 
TIME 2 ~HOURS 
INSTRU CTIONS : 
THIS PAPER CONTAINS FOURTEEN (14) QUESTIONS. CANDIDATES ARE 
REQUIRED TO ANSWER ANY TEN (10) QUESTIONS WIDCH CARRY TEN 
(10) MARKS EACH. 
NB:- QUESTIONS ANSWERED IN EXCESS OF TEN WILL NOT BE ASSESSED. 
THIS EXAMINAT ION IS WORTH 100 MARKS. 
THE PASS MARK IS 50o/o. 
YOU ARE REMINDED OF THE NEED TO USE PROPER DICTION, 
CORRECT SF'ELLING, STANDARD GRAMMAR AND AN ORDERLY, 
LEGIBLE AND NEAT PRESENTATION OF YOUR WORK. 
WRITE YOUR EXAMINATION NUMBER ON THE COVER OF THE 
EXAMINATION BOOKLET AND THE TOP OF EVERY PAGE 
THROU GHOUT THE BOOKLET. 
DO NOT W:RITE YOUR NAME AND REGIME NTAL 
NUMBER IJ~ REPSONSE TO ANY QUESTION. 



3. 
I I 
1. Name five (5) conditions that must be satisfied before a dying declaration may be admitted in 
evidence in a court of law. 
(10 marks ) 
2. (a) A defendant who had been duly served to appear before the court in answer to a charge, 
failed to appear before the court at the appointed date and time. Section 44 of the 
Summary Courts Act, Chapter 4:20 authorizes a magistrate to exercise one of three options. 
Name these options. (3 marks ) 
(b) State th1 .. statutory time limit for instituting proceedings for each of the following 
offencet 
(a) 
(a) Resisting an arrest for the offence of arson. 
(b) Obtaining property valued $1,950.00 by use of a dishonoured cheque. 
(c:) Assault with intent to rob. 
(d) Assault by beating committed by a masked person. 
(e) Buggery. 
(f) Inciting an animal to put a person in bodily fear. 
(g) Simple robbery. (7 marks) 
Defme the term 'offensive weapon' under the criminal law. (6 marks) 
(b) X, is the lead singer in the church choir. Over the past five weeks X had been the victim 
of three robberies whilst driving horne from choir practice. Whilst venting his frustration 
abou1 the lack of police presence along the route one day an officer told X that he also 
has a responsibility to take certain precautions in order to avoid being an '·easy target'. 
Later that day X thought about what the officer said and placed a cutlass in his car as an 
emergency measure. That said night; X was stopped in a road block exercise while on 
his way horne from practice . While checking inside the vehicle an officer saw the 
cutlass and asked X about it, whereupon he recounted his previous experie nces as a 
robbery victim. He added that he knew that the police could not be everywhere at once, 
but if he was attacked again at least he would be able to defend hims elf until the police 
arrived. 
Can X be prosecuted for any offence? Give a brief reason for your answer. (4 marks) 
4. Examine each of the statements made below and indicate whether it is true or false: 
(a) Illegall y obtained evidence is still admissible in a court of law. 
(b) A slight touch is insufficient to constitute a battery under the criminal law. 
(c) All indictable offences are also arrestable offences. 
(d) Hybrid offences are special offences listed under the Forestry Act, 
Chapter 66:01 
(e) It is a legal presumption that a boy 14 years and under cannot be convicted 
for the offence of rape . 
(f) A swnmons must be served upon a witness at least twenty four hours 
before the date and time that the witness is required to appear before the court. 
(g) A search warrant may be executed at anytime except on Sundays. 
1 



I 
(h) The standard of proof in criminal cases is 'proof beyond the shadow of a doubt'. 
(i) A person found in possession of more than 20 grams of heroin is deemed 
to be in possession of a dangerous drug for the purpose of trafficking. 
G) The Latin term 'in flagrante delicto' means that the criminal was caught in 
the act. (10 marl<s) 
5. (a) Regulation 4 (1) of the Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic (Mobile Devices) Regulations, 
6. 
2010 prohibits a person from holding or using a hand-held mobile device on any road 
while driving or having charge of any motor vehicle. However, Regulation 9 provides 
three circumstances under which these provisions will not apply. 
Name them . (6 marks) 
(b) State the words of the warning of intended prosecution that is to be administered to 
drivers in accordance with Section 73 (1) of the Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Act, 
Chapter 48:50 . 
(a) 
(4 marks) 
Name four (4} classes of persons who may be considered incompetent to give evidence 
in court. (4 marks) 
(b) It is a general rule that the prosecution is required to call all the evidence which it 
intends to rely on before the close of the case. 
State three (:ll exceptions to this general rule. (6 marks) 
7. The Case of R v Turnbull sets out a number of rules or guidelines in relation to the admissibility 
of identificat ion evidence. 
Name any five (5) of these rules/guidelines. (10 marks) 
8. Arising out of a joint exercise between membe rs of the Coast Guard and the Police Service, 
five suspects were detained in relation to a drug trafficking offence in the coastal waters of 
Trinidad and Tobago. Three of the suspects are natives of a neighbouring Spanish country and 
do not speak the English language. An officer under your supervision has been detailed to 
conduct investigation into the matter. The officer has approached you for clarification on the 
procedure that is to be followed when interrogating and recording statements from foreigners. 
Advise the officer on the requirements of the Judges' Rules and Administrative Directions to the 
Police as it relates to the interrogation and record ing of statements from foreigners. 
(10 marks) 
9. A had been in an abusive relationship with her husband B for the past four years. There were no 
children of the marriage as A feared that they would also be abused. A's sister had been 
advising her to get out of the marriage, but A considered herself trapped by the words in her 
wedding vow that stated 'till death do us part'. One day A visited the local garden store and 
purchased some rat poison as she decided that it was time that the marriage carne to an end. She 
mixed some of the poison with some wine and placed it in a bottle that was labeled 'Special 
2 



Pump-Up'. She hid the bottle in her handbag and went to have a shower. Whilst A was having 
her shower B arrived at home. Realizing that A was in the shower, B took the opportunity to 
search througp her handbag to see what cash he could find to purchase alcohol, when he found 
the bottle with the mixture. B opened the bottle and drank the entire contents, smiled at what he 
had done and placed the empty bottle bag in the handbag. He then left to go on a drinking spree 
with some cash that he found in A's handbag. Whilst at the barB collapsed and died of the 
poisoning. When A received the news of his death she smiled but said nothing. The police have 
since found the empty bottle in A's handbag. 
What offence, if any, did A commit? Discuss fully stating the applicable law with the 
appropriate analysis of the elements of a crime in your answer. (10 marks) 
10. Tan accomplished computer programmer was at a restaurant one evening when he overheard a 
patron whom he recognized as his manager boasting that no intruder can break into his home 
beacuse of his new alarm system. T took this information as a challenge and set about hacking 
into his manager's computer systems to gain confidential information. T used his computer 
skills to remotely activate the web cameras on his manager's home computers in order to 
monitor the members of the household. At 7:30 pm one evening while T was spying on his 
manager via web camera, he observed the manager and his wife secured and left their home to 
attend an engagement. T decided that he would go into the house and help himself to some of 
the expensive jewellry that was kept on the bedroom dressing table which could be easily 
pawned. About one hour later, T arrived at the manager's home and used the security 
information he gained from his hacking exercise to disable the security system. T then calmly 
opened the front door and stepped inside. However, before he got any further he heard a growl 
and as he raised his head he saw the family's pitbull terrier rushing towards him. T managed to 
make a hasty retreat closing the door behind him as he left empty handed. 
What offence, if any, did T commit? 
Discuss fully stating the applicable law with the appropriate analysis of the elements of a crime 
m your answer. (10 marks) 
11. While on her way to the shopping mall one evening, a young lady was focused on reading and 
sending instant text messages to her friends via the blackberry messaging system on her mobile 
phone. Unknown to her, a man had been trailing her awaiting an opportunity to confront her and 
seize the mobile phone and whatever cash she had in her possession. As she approached a 
corner, the young man snatched the mobile phone from her hand and continued to walk past 
her. The young lady looked at the man and saw a tattoo at the back of his neck which placed her 
in fear as she recognized it as a symbol used by the members of a known gang. She started to 
panic as she became fearful that there may be other gang members around. However, the 
incident had been captured on the police CCTV cameras and the man was held by officers on 
patrol. 
What offence, if any, did the young man commit? 
Discuss fully stating the applicable law with appropriate analysis in your answer. 
(10marks) 
12. A young lady and her boyfriend had been seeing each other for several months during which 
time their ac1s of intimacy had been limited to passionate kissing and the occasional caressing 
of each other's body. This reluctance was due to the young lady's fear that her father would be 
furious if she were to get impregnated before marriage. Late one evening when her parents were 
out she invited her boyfriend over to keep her company. After some coaxing by the boyfriend, 
she agreed that they would have intercourse. To spice things up she performed an exotic dance 
and aroused him with other teasing gestures. Moments later they were locked in embrace 
engaging in sexual intercourse when her gaze fell upon a photo of her father that she had at her 
bedside. She suddenly had a change of heart and told her boyfriend to stop. He responded that 
they were in the middle of something and she should not let her father's photo block their 
enjoyment, and they may as well finish what was started. When he had completed to his 
3 



satisfaction he told her that he loved her and left. A few minutes later her parents returned home 
and on checking he\ room to say goodnight, her father observed evidence ofthe sexual activity, 
when he questioned1his daughter she said that she had been raped. 
Discuss fully whether the offence of rape had in fact been committed, stating the applicable law 
with appropriate analysis in your answer. 
(lOmarks) 
13. At around 9:15pm one night while the neighbourhood watclunan was on duty he saw a male 
youth walking through one of the streets. He also noticed that the young man was wearing a cap 
with the peak turned sideways and that the sleeves on his shirt were cut-off so that his arms 
were exposed. The watchman was aware that the members of a certain gang near the area had 
adopted these dressing traits as symbols of their group. The watclunan formed the opinion that 
the youth was a threat to his community and set his guard dog upon him. The young man 
managed to get hold of a piece of wood which he used to knock the dog to the ground. As the 
dog lay on the ground the watchman saw when the young man raised the piece of wood over the 
dog to strike another blow which the watclunan believed would have killed the dog. As a result, 
he fatally shot the young man. The residents of the neighbourhood all claim that the shooting is 
covered under the principles applicable to self defence. 
Discuss fully whether the watchman can be prosecuted for any offence, stating the applicable law 
with appropriate analysis in your answer. (10 marl<s) 
14. Due to the spate of serious crimes in his neighbourhood, a man believed that the end of the 
world was rapidly approaching, and that it was time that he repented for his sins and make 
peace with the creat1,)r. He started an intense reading of chapters in the Holy Bible and his daily 
conversations were filled with proverbs and bible verses. One day he told his family that in 
order for souls to be saved, persons must be willing to make sacrifices by giving up treasure d 
material things deru to them and maybe the creator may spare the world from destruction. 
In-keeping with this belief, he released the handbrake on his expensive automobile and allowed 
it to roll off a bridge and crash into a river. He then decided that although they may not know it, 
his neighbours needed to make similar sacrifices towards the greater good. Around 7:00pm one 
evening while his neighbour was not looking he entered their house and removed their 
expensive LCD television set from the house and later donated it to a charitable organization. 
As he was sitting outside the house of another neighbour deciding what sacrifice was needed 
from that fanuly, the police arrived to interview him with respect to the television set that he 
had previously taken. 
State whether the man has committed any criminal offence. 
Discuss fully stating the applicable law with appropriate analysis in your answer. 
(lOmarks) 
END 
4 