2009 POli[E PROMOTION (MAIN) EWUNATION TO THE 
RANI OF SERGEANT 
SUBJECT: LAW 
DATE: Saturday 22"d August 2009 
TIME ALLOWED: 2Yl Hours 
INSTRUCTIONS: 
THIS PAPER CONTAINS FOURTEEN (14) QUESTIONS, CANDIDATES ARE 
REQUIRED TO ANSWER ANY TEN (10) QUESTIONS. 
PASS MARK IS 50 MARKS. 
NB. WHERE MORE THAN TEN (10) QUESTIONS ARE ANSWERED, ONLY THE FIRST 
TEN (10) WILL BE ASSESSED 
l. Define the meaning of any five of the following terms under the Domestic 
Violence Act Chapter 45:56: 
• Applicant 
• Clerk 
• Dependent 
• Domestic Violence 
• Physical abuse 
• Spouse (10 marks) 
2. Write short notes on any four of the following under the Firearms Act Ch 16:01: 
3. 
• Controlled Delivery 
• Competent Authority 
• Firearm Users Licence 
• Firearm Dealers Licence 
• Public place (10 marks) 
State whether the following statements are true or false: (10 marks) 
a. A hybrid offence is an offence under the Forestry Act. 
b. The consent of the DPP is required for all offences under the Perjury Act. 
c. Persons above the age of sixteen years can lawfully purchase alcohol. 
d. A Time Allowed Commitment warrant can be executed at any time and 
place. 
e. The least touching whatsoever will constitute a battery under the criminal law. 



4. (a) In a trial at the Magistrates' Court a witness is generally subjected to 
three stages of examination. Identify and explain fully any two of these stages. 
(b) Name four classes of persons who may be considered to be 'incompetent' to 
give evidence in court. 
5. Where a vehicle is parked on a road in contravention of any provision of the 
Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Act ("the Act") or is left on any road in such a 
manner that it is likely to cause an obstruction to persons lawfully using any 
such road, Section 108 ( 1) of the Act provides two actions that a police officer 
may take. 
Explain the provisions of Section 108 ( 1) of the Act. 
6. Name ten (10) street offences under section 64(1) of the Summary Offences Act 
(6 marks) 
(4 marks) 
(10 marks) 
Chapter 11 :02. (10 marks) 
7 State the statutory limitation period for the foHowing offences: (10 marks) 
a. Larceny under the Summary Offences Act; 
b. Obscene language; 
c. Driving without due care and attention; 
d. Discharging a firearm within forty metres of a public road; 
e. House breaking and larceny (summary trial); 
f. Obtaining property by use of a dishonoured cheque; 
g. Fraudulent conversion under the Summary Offences Act; 
h. Larceny Servant in the sum of $2,000.00; 
1. Attempt to obtain goods valued $5,000 .00 by false pretences; 
J. Inciting a dog to attack. 
8. One day three teenage boys went to a swimming pool for a day of fun. Around mid­
afternoon two of them left to get snacks . The third boy ventured into the deeper part of the 
pool to test his skill, whereupon he got into difficulty and called for help. At that time, the 
only person at the pool was a young man who had been training for a championship 
swimming competition. He was standing at the edge of the pool exercising before taking his 
practice . He looked at the screaming boy and decided that if he tried to help him it might 
upset his training schedule . So he did nothing but hoped that someone else would arrive to 
assist. No one came in time to save the boy from drowning. The boy's friends and parents 
have made a report and they want the swimmer prosecuted. 
What offence, if any, has been committed? 
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer. 
(10 marks) 
2 



9. While at the police station one afternoon you received a telephone call from a lady who 
reported that her neighbour, who had previously been warned by a magistrate about his 
abusive conduct towards his wife, was at the house beating his wife and loudly making 
threats to hurt her permanently. You dispatched two constables to the house to attend to the 
report. Having arrived at the house the officers were met by a man who identified himself as 
a police officer senior in rank to them and told them that it was a family dispute and that 
they should return to their station. One of the constables observed that the man's wife was 
lying on the floor in the house with what appeared to be bruises about her face and body. As 
the constable attempted to get a closer look inside the house the man told him that there was 
no court order in effect authorizing their entry without his permission and he was instructing 
them to leave the premises. The officers have now called you at the station requesting 
advice as to what action, if any, they can take in the circumstances as described. 
Advise the constables in accordance with the provisions ofthe Domestic Violence Act. 
(10 marks) 
10. Slim and Trim were twin brothers who were almost identical and very few persons were 
able to tell them apart. Their neighbour Sammy, a hunter, felt a sense of self-pride in his 
ability to distinguish the brothers almost one hundred percent of the time. In fact, Trim and 
Sammy were best of friends and he would often share with Trim the meat of animals that he 
shot. One afternoon while on his way home after having a couple of beers with his friends, 
Sammy saw his girlfriend in what he considered a compromising position in a car with 
Slim. Sammy got his shotgun and lay in wait for Slim to return home. About one hour later 
Sammy saw the figure of Slim approaching and he aimed at the person's chest discharged a 
fatal shot. Later when the body was identified it was discovered that the deceased was Trim. 
Sammy broke down in tears and stated that he never had any intention to kill or cause any 
harm to his friend Trim. 
What offence, if any, was committed? 
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer. 
(10 marks) 
11. One evening a man was driving along a street when he noticed what appeared to be some 
money lying on the pavement. He brought his car to a stop and saw that it was in fact some 
cash folded in two and held together with a rubber band. The man took up the cash, looked 
around in all directions and saw that no one had been paying attention to him. He then 
placed the money in his pants pocket and casually drove away. Unknown to him however, a 
lady who had been looking out of her window from a nearby apartment had observed his 
actions. The next day the lady reported the incident to police officers who were on patrol in 
the area. The officers have traced the identity of the vehicle owner and are now seeking your 
advice as to the offence if any for which the man can be prosecuted. 
Advise the officers on what offence, if any, has been committed. 
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer. 
(10 marks) 
3 



12. One night a group of friends assembled at a house to bring a climactic end to their 
Independence Day celebration. They had been enjoying the display of fireworks at the 
community ground; and at their location they were opening bottles of champagne with a 
popping sound. During the festivity one of the celebrants placed a gun in the hand of one of 
the guests and said 'you are the sheriff here'. The celebrant then pointed at a woman 
dressed in black and said that she was a 'bandit'. The man was then encouraged to shoot the 
bandit whereupon he aimed the gun and shot at the woman who fell to the ground. He then 
raised his hand and shouted 'Call me Terminate-Her!' However, within moments the other 
guests realized that the woman was bleeding from a chest wound. At that stage the man 
dropped the gun and said that he thought that it was a toy. The woman was pronounced dead 
on arrival at the district hospital. Enquiries by the police have revealed that the man has 
been certified as having been trained in the use of firearms. He has been charged for an 
offence in relation to the death. 
Discuss fully whether the man has any defence available to a charge of murder or 
manslaughter. 
(10 marks) 
13. . One morning a party of revenue officers attached to the Board ofinland Revenue obtained a 
warrant to search the premises of a businessman for certain items. Together with a 
uniformed constable attached to the revenue office, the party visited the address of the 
businessman. However, by the time they arrived at the premises the constable complained 
that he was not feeling well and ·he remained in the vehicle. The revenue officers 
approached the entrance to the business and were greeted by the owner. Having revealed 
their purpose the owner allowed them in and they commenqed an examination of his 
records. During this process, the businessman's nephew arrived and stopped the officers 
from continuing with their examination. Despite their efforts to explain themselves to the 
businessman and his nephew, the revenue officers were met with hostility from the man's 
nephew who ordered them out of the premises. In order to avoid the situation becoming 
physical the officers left. The matter has been referred to your station for investigation. 
Can the businessman's nephew be prosecuted for any offence? 
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer. 
(10 marks) 
14. One evening a woman wearing dark nylon clothing visited a supermarket to shop. She took 
up a shopping basket and made her way through the isles at the supermarket and selected 
three inexpensive items, which she placed in the basket. As she stood at the cashier's 
counter, the security officer on duty observed that she appeared to be pregnant. He however, 
recalled noticing her arrival and that her appearance was not the same. He kept her under 
observation and as she was about to exit the supermarket having paid for the three items he 
stopped her. On investigation, it was discovered that the woman had a quantity of snacks 
and other small items from the supermarket, which she had not paid for concealed under her 
clothing . The police were contacted but the woman has been claiming that she did not leave 
the premises so there is nothing that the police can do. 
Has any criminal offence been committed? 
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer. 
(10 marks) 
End 
4 