2010 POLICE PROMOTION (SUPPLEMENTAL) EXAMINATION 
TO THE RANK OF CORPORAL 
SUBJE CT: LAW 
DATE: 19 th October , 2010 
TIME ALLOW ED: 2Yz Hours 
INSTRUCTIONS: 
THIS PAPER CONTAINS FOURTEEN (14) QUESTIONS, CANDIDATES ARE REQUIRED 
TO ANSWER ANY TEN (10) QUESTIONS. 
THE PASS MARK IS 50% 
N.B. WHER E MORE THAN TEN (10) QUESTIONS ARE ANSWERED, ONLY THE FIRST 
TEN (10) WILL BE ASSESSED. 
2. 
I. While on his way to take up a position at a taxi stand one morning, the driver stopped at a 
doubles vendor to purchase a meal. He orde red two doubles and indicated that he did not want 
any pepper sauce in them . Having paid for the meal he walked to his taxi and while biting into 
one of the doubles he tasted pepper sauce. He promptly returned to the vendor and started to 
hurl abuses at him, then threw the doub les at the vendor's feet and walked away. He entered his 
vehicle and drove off without bothe ring to fasten his seat belt. Moments later he parked the 
vehicle within 9 meters of a fire stat ion in order to go into a m ini mart to purchase a juice. On 
his return, he drove to the taxi stand and managed to secure the posit ion at the head of the sta nd. 
Whilst awaiting passengers he noticed that two drivers at the rear of the line were enticin g 
passengers to board their vehicles . He tried to get the attent ion of the police officer on duty, but 
the officer did not see the beckoning of the driver as he was some distance away. The driver 
then walked to where the officer stood and made a complaint against the other drive rs. As he 
was returning to his taxi one of the other drivers remarked that he was a snitch . He then walked 
up to the driver who made the comment and kicked the front fender of the driver's vehicle 
causing a slight dent on the vehicle. 
Name five {S) offences that the taxi driver would have committed. 
a. 
b. 
In order for a person to be prosecuted for the offence of fraudu lent 
conversion, the prosecut ion must adduce evidence that the defendant 
was entrusted with property to do one of [our actions . 
Name these actions . 
State the essential elements to establish the offence of incest. 
(10 marks) 
(4 marks) 
(6 marks ) 



3. a. Define the term "assault" under the Crimina l Law . (3 marks) 
b. Define the term "battery" unde r the Crimina l Law. (3 marks) 
c. At a football match one even ing the home team was down by two goals to nothing in the 
first half. The players began to feel disenchanted as they believed that the referee had 
not been administering his functions fajrly. Dur ing the half-time interval the players 
complained to their coach and he too found that the referee was not calling blatant 
infringements by members of the visiting team . He however, encouraged them to play 
on and promised to lodge a complaint in the aftermath of the game. In the twentieth, 
minute in the second half the visitors scored a third goal while the home team's score 
remained at nil. Moments after the visitors scored their third goal a player from the 
home team made his way tlu·ough the defence of the visitors and was poised to score a 
goal when two players from the opposing team slammed their bodies into him from 
opposite ang les caus ing him to fall seriously hurt. The referee did not blow his whistle 
to indicate a fou l. On observing the referee's failure, two of the fallen player's team­
mates selected a p layer on the visiting team and even though he was not in possession of 
the ball, they "skate tackled" the player causing him to fall to the ground . The referee 
expelled the two players from the game, and later that day he made a repOii to the police 
about the tackle on the playe r from the visiting team requesting that the police prosecute 
the two players from the home team for an assault related offence . 
Can the two players be prosecuted fo r any offence? 
Give brief reasons for your answer. (4 marks) 
4. Define any four (4) ofthe fo llowing terms : 
(a) Hostile witness. 
(b) Unfavourable witness . 
(c) Leading question . 
(d) Doli incapax . 
(e) Direct evidence. 
(10 marks) 
5. (a) What offence is committed if A shoots at B with the intent to do him 
grievous bodily harm but misses and kills C instead? 
Give a brief reason for your answer. (5 marks) 
(b) Explain what is an inquest? (5 marks) 
6. (a) Name four (4) except ions to the rule against the admissibility of 
hearsay evidence . (8 marks) 
(b) Define the term "circums tantial evidence" in the Crim inal Law . (2 marks) 
2 



I 
7. Name the four (4) ways by which a person js legally defined as the parent or grandparent of a 
chi ld in accordance with Section 3 of the Domestic Violence Act Chapter 45:56 . (10 marks) 
8. Late one evening a lady visited a fast food outlet and entered the line to make a purchase . 
Momen ts later two young men entered the estab lishment and immediately started to complain 
about the length of the line. One of the yotmg men then started to make comical but derogatory 
remarks about fat persons to which most of the patrons at the establishment burst out in fits of 
laughte r. The young lady collected the meal that she purchased and was making her way out of 
the estab lishment when, on passing the young men, one of them made a comment about her 
being fat, which resulted in laughter from some of the patrons . At that point, the lady slapped 
the young man who had made the insulting comment and told him that he should go and wash 
his mouth and learn to have respect for large-sized women . The other patrons applauded her 
actions, but the young man reported the matter to the pol ice and the woman was prosecuted for 
a crimina l offence . The lady has raised the defence of provocation at her trial. 
Discuss the chances ofthis defence being pleaded successfully . (10 marks) 
9. One day a man who had just been fired from his place of employment went to the bus terminal 
to await transport to get to his home . The line had been very long and he had to wait on a 
second bus as passengers ahead of him filled the one that arrived at the terminal. Whilst in the 
line, he dec ided to visit a vendor to purc hase a beverage and he stepped out the line to pursue 
his desire. Having purchased an item he returned to the line and attempted to take up the 
position he had just left, where upon persons in the line made objections and accused him of 
cutt ing-in. An argument started between the man and the passenger who had been immediate ly 
behind him. At that stage, another man - V-, approached and told everyone to calm down. V 
then told both men that they were not behavi ng orderly and enquired what was going on. The 
man who had been trying to get back in the line told V that he should mind his own business 
and pushed him aside . As V attempted to touch the man on his shoulder to get his attention the 
man cuffed V in his face and a fight ensued between both men. Security officers quick ly arrived 
at the scene and pa11ed the fight. It was later discovered that V was a police detective. The man 
was later charged for the offence of assaulting a police officer in the exec ution of his duty. The 
man has claimed that at no time did V identify himself as a police officer so that he could not be 
convicted for that specific offence . 
\Vhat are the chances of the man being convicted for the offence with which he was charged? 
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer . (lOmarks) 
10. Late one evening a female employee visited the doctor and was diagnosed as having the chicken 
pox virus . The doctor prescr ibed medicat ion, and issued a medical cer1ificate that 
recommended a period of seven days sick leave that commenced on the following date . On 
returning to her workplace she showed the medical certificate to one of her colleagues who 
drew it to her attention that the doctor had recommended the sick leave to commence on the th 
day of the month which was a Saturday. Realizing that she was already off-duty that weeke nd, 
she adjusted the date on the medical certificate to reflect the commencement date as the 9rh 
instead of the 7th and prepared an application for sick leave to commence on the following 
Monday. She entrusted the application together with the medica l certificate to anothe r one of 
her colleagues to deliver to their superv isor. On the following Monday the employee's 
colleague handed the documents to the shift supervisor who observed the date change on the 
medical cer1ificate and referred the matter to the police . 
3 
Discuss fully the liability of the fema le employee and her colleague who handed in the 
documents to the superv isor. (1 0 rna rks) 



11. A woman had not approved of the man her younger sister chose as her intimate companion. On 
many occasions the siblings argued as the elder one tried to convince her sister that her 
companion was a bad influence, and that he lived the life of a criminal. One evening as the 
woman was driving home from the supermarket, she saw her sister's companion in a transaction 
which she determined to be related to the illicit drug trade. As the young man attempted to cross 
the street, the woman drove her vehicle straig ht at him and struck causing him a slight injury to 
his leg. 
For what offence, if any, can the woman be charged? Discuss fully the reasons for your answer. 
(lOmark s) 
12. A young man of seventeen eloped with his thirteen year old girlfriend and they got married 
under Muslim Rites. They had been engaging in sexual intercourse together for over a week at a 
beach resort that they rented. The girl's parents received information on their whereabouts and 
together with a party of police officers, confronted them at the beach house. The senior police 
officer on the scene informed the couple that their marriage was not valid as the girl's parents 
did not give their consent. The couple insisted that they were married and have produced a 
marriage certificate as proof. The senior police officer repeated that their maJTiage was void as 
parental consent had not been given. 
Can the young man be prosecuted for any offence under the Sexual Offences Act? Discuss 
fully the reasons for your answer. (lOm a r ks) 
13. A woman who had been working with a company for the past fifteen years had on many 
occasions been comp limented as the most productive employee at the company . On numerous 
occasions her friends and co-workers commented that she deserved to be promoted to the level 
of supervisor . However, her approach to the manager for either a promot ion or a raise were 
always tw·ned down. One day after negotiat ing a large sale with a customer, she considered that 
she was being treated unfairly and decided that it was time to compensate herself for her tireless 
efforts on behalf of the company . She opened the cash register and removed the sum of $800.00 
in cash which she later used to purchase food for her family . When confronted by the police, the 
woman stated that she had a moral claim of right to the money. 
For what offence, if any, can the woman be prosecuted? Discuss fully the reasons for your 
answer. (10 mark s) 
14. A man had been entertaining some guests at his home when he noticed that one of them was 
wearing a diamond-studded Swiss-made gold watch on his wrist. As the "get together" came to 
an end, the man invited that particular guest to stay for the night which the guest did. At around 
11 :00 pm the man said that he was going to take a walk and left the house . About thirty minutes 
later, the man quietly opened a closed window in the room that the guest was occupying, 
entered the room and took the gold watch and left via his point of entry. The matter was 
reported to the police and the man was later arrested and charged with the offence of burglary. 
What are the chances of the man being convicted for this offence? Discuss fully the reason for 
your answer. (lOmark s) 
E nd 
4 



I "' t I 1 l . I 
2009 POli£E PROMOTION (MAIN) EWIINATION 
TO .THE RANK OF [ORPORAl 
SUBJECT: LAW 
DATE: Saturday 18111 July, 2009 
TIME ALLOWED: 2V. Hours 
INSTRUCTIONS: 
THIS PAPER CONTAINS FOURTEEN (14) QUESTIONS , CANDIDATES ARE 
REQUIRED TO ANSWER ANY TEN (10) QUESTIONS. 
NB. WHERE MORE THAN TEN (10) QUESTION S ARE ANSWERED, ONLY THE 
FIRST TEN (10) WILL BE ASSESSE D. 
1. Where service of an order of the court has not been able to be made personally on a 
respondent, the court may make an order for substituted service. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
State fully the means by which substituted service may be made under the Domestic 
Violence Act. 
(10 mark s) 
(a) Define the following terms under the Children's Act Chapter 46 :01 as amended : 
(i) 
(ii) 
Legal Guardian 
Cruelty 
State ten (10) defences to liability under the criminaJ law. 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(a) 
State what is meant by the term "indictable offence" 
State what is meant by the term "doli incapax" 
Name three (3) inchoate offences 
Define the offence of incest under the criminal law. 
(b) Where a cautioned statement has been recorded by a police officer, 
Rule V (e) of the Judges Rule prescribes a ceriificate that is to be 
written at the end of that statement. 
Write out the words of that certificate. 
(5 marks) 
(5 marks) 
(10 marks) 
(2 marks) 
(2 marks) 
(6 marks ) 
(6 marks ) 
(4 mark s) 
1 



6. 
7 
(a) Define the following terms under the Kidnapping Act No. 21 of2003 . 
(i) Child 
(ii) Money 
(b) Explain the provisions of Section 3(2) of the Anti-Kidnapping Act 
No. 21 of2003 as it relates to consent . 
(a) Name the two (2) forms of recklessness under the criminal law. 
(b) Define the two (2) forms of recklessness under the criminal Jaw. 
(3 marks) 
(3 marks) 
(4 marks) 
(2 marks) 
(8 marks) 
8. A party of police officers was returning to their base from an early morning exercise for 
narcotics in one of the seacoast areas in Trinidad, when a man with a large bag slung over 
his back was observed walking along the roadway. As the vehicle approached the man 
the officers recognized him as a defendant before the district court who had been granted 
bail on several narcotic cases. The officers arrested the man on suspicion of a narcotic 
offence and seized the bag with a large amount of grass as its contents . At the police 
station a detailed examination of the grass in the bag was made and it was discovered that 
the grass was not marijuana as they thought but other leafy grass for feeding animals. The 
only traces of marijuana in the bag were two dried seeds and some residue from which it 
was concluded that the bag had previously been used to carry marijuana. 
Has any offence been committed by the man? 
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer. 
(10 marks) 
9. A young unemployed woman who wanted to buy a ticket for an upcoming show at which 
the appearance of some top international singers had been advert ised, resolved to engage 
in a one-time only project to make some quick cash . At around 7:00pm that evening, she 
dressed herself in black clothing, inclusive of a cap, then visited one of her friends of a 
notorious character and borrowed a handgun from him . She then went to a dimly lit area 
and lay in wait for a victim. After waiting a few minutes, she observed a young man who 
was walking towards her, placing what appeared to be cash into a leather pouch that he 
was carrying. As he approached her place of concealment she lunged out at him with the 
gun pointed at his face and said "Gimme dab money boy!" But as she saw the look of 
terror on his face she had a change of heart and ran from the scene without taking 
anything from the young man. 
Has the young woman committed any offence? 
Discuss fully the reasons for yow- answer. (Disregard any firearm possession offences in 
answering this question). 
(lOmarks) 
10. A widower of 37, who had been sharing a common law relationship with a woman for 
over three years had been telling his spouse about violent crimes that had been occurring 
in the neighbourhood over the last two months . He knew that such events scared her as 
she always expressed her discomf01i at resid ing in high crime areas. The truth of the 
matter was that he had found romance with another woman and he wanted his present 



spouse to move out of their home and return to the home of her parents. Realizing that 
she still felt reasonably safe at their home he formed a plan . At around 7:00 pm one 
Friday evening he told her that he was going fishing for the weekend and would not be 
back until the Sunday evening and he left. At 10:45 pm the woman secured the house and 
retired to bed. Two hours later, the widower, wearing a disguise, returned to the house 
and removed some louvres from a side window and climbed inside. He then packed some 
electronic items into a bag, took up a bottle of expensive liquor and left via the point of 
entry at 1 :20 am. However, his activities had been observed by one of the neighbours, 
who had summoned the police and he was held a short distance away. 
What offence, if any, was committed? 
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer. 
(10m arks) 
11. After attending a football match one evening an angry fan got into a heated argument 
with the coach of one of the teams, as he blamed the loss on the coach's omission of one 
of the players as a substitute in the game. The ru·gument got so intense that they started to 
hurl threats of violence against each other, which resulted in the intervention of the 
security officers, who ejected the man from the area where the players were assembled. 
One week later the coach was taking his children to an amusement park for an evening of 
fun. He secured his vehicle in a car park and walked to cross the street towards the 
amusement park. However, as he stood on the sidewalk awaiting the traffic signal to 
cross, he saw the angry fan from the previous week standing on the sidewalk at the 
opposite side of the street with a menacing expression on his face, which made the coach 
tremble where he stood. The man formed a fist with one hand and made a punching 
motion towards the coach, while he beckoned him to cross with the other. The coach 
realized that a fight was imminent and he did not wish for his children to witness such an 
incident. Instead of crossing the street, he made his way to the nearby police post and 
report ed the incident. A constab le subsequently arres ted the man and charged him with 
the offence of assault. 
What are the chances of the man being convicted for this offence? 
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer. 
(IOmark s) 
12. One evening two businessmen were discussing the new trend that street gangs had 
adopted of carrying out kill ings and robberies at prayer meetings and funerals of 
deceased gang members and sometimes other persons. One evening one of the 
businessmen was on his way home from attending a burial of a friend when he saw what 
he believed to be the motor vehicle of a gang member proceeding slowly in his direction. 
Realizing that he was adorned with a generous amount of jewelry he formed the opinion 
that he was about to become a victim, and summoned the courage inside him to defend 
himself. As the vehicle slowed down next to him and as the driver wound down the glass, 
the young man wasted no time. He whipped out his licensed firearm and fatally shot the 
two occupants in the vehicle, before they had a chance to react. You were appointed the 
investigating officer in this matter and your investigat ion has been concluded . 
Can the businessman be prosecuted for any offence? 
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer. 
(lOmark s) 



13. A girl who was born in June 1995 had developed a mischievous nature over the past 
three years . She was known among her friends as a flirt and the type who knew how 
to use men. She secretly befriended one of her mother's male co-workers and with 
whom she discussed her sexual fantasies. One day they agreed that they had done 
enough talking and they engaged in consensual sexual intercourse . They enjoyed the 
act so much that they repeated it on severa l occasions over the two weefs that 
followed . However, the girl's mother found out what was happening and confronted 
her about the affair, whereupon she told her mother that the man had forced himself 
upon her. You have conducted enquiries into a report that was made by the girl's 
mother and have discovered the aforementioned facts. 
Can the man be prosecuted for any offence? 
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer . 
(10 marks) 
14. One evening a young woman told her fiance that she was ending their engagement as 
she realized that she was not ready to settle into a long-term relationship . The young 
man pleaded with her and said that he could not live without her, but she told him 
that she needed to 'shop around' before she committed herself to any one man. Later 
that evening the young man felt so devastated that he sat on a park bench and 
shouted, "I am a failure in life !" He then pointed a gun to his head and squeezed the 
trigger intending to kill himself. Howeve r, just before the bullet was fired, the barrel 
of the gun slid to the rear of his head, causing the bullet to miss its target and hit a 
man who had been exercising a few meters from the bench. The man died at the 
hospital the next day. The detective at your station has submitted that it is a straight 
case oftransferred malice. 
Do you agree that the doctrine of transferred malice applies? 
Discuss fully the reason for your answer. 
(lOmarks) 
End 



2010 POLICE PROMOTION (MAIN) EXAMINATION 
T O THE RANI{ OF CORPORAL 
SUBJECT: LAW 
DATE: 12TH JUNE, 2010 
TIME ALLOWED: 2 YzHOURS 
INSTRUCTIONS : 
THIS PAPER CONTAINS FOURTEEN (14) QUEST IONS, CANDIDATES ARE REQUIRED TO 
ANSWER ANY TEN (10) QUESTIONS . 
THE PASS MARK IS 50% 
N.B. WHERE MORE THAN TEN (10) QUESTIO NS ARE ANSWERED, ONLY THE FIRST TEN 
(10) WILL BE ASSESSED . 
1. Section 46 of the Summary Offences Act Chapter 11:02 stipulates that a person who commits certain 
offences may be deemed a rogue and a vagabond. 
State five (5) such offences. (10 marl<s) 
2. Earlier this morning A and B were on the compound of the examination centre when an argument 
erupted over which of them was the senior employee on the site. A suddenly ptmched B in his chest 
and told him to shove off and go and do his work . B immediately went to the police station and 
lodged a complaint. The decision has been taken to charge A for the offence of assault by beating. 
(i) Write out the copy of charge in relation to the offence for which A is to be charged . 
(5 marks) 
(ii) State the statutory limitation for the offence of assault by beating. (2Yz marks) 
(iii) Would the decision to charge A have been any different if A's hand had only made slight 
contact with B causing no hurt or injury whatsoever? 
Give reasons for yolU· answer. (2 Yz marks) 
3. The case R v Turnbull sets out a number of rules or guidelines in relation to the admissibility of 
identification evidence. 
Name any five (5) of these rules/guidelines. (10 marks) 
1 



4. State whether the following statements are true or false: 
5. 
6. 
(a) It is an offence to park at a distance of more than 9 meters from a fire hydrant. 
(b) The offence of larceny servant in the stun of $1,000 .00 is a summary offence. 
(c) All indictable offences are also atTestable offences. 
(d) It is an offence to park within 3 meters of a fire stat ion. 
(e) A person can only be held liable for his wrongful acts and cmmot be criminally liable if he 
refrained from doing someth ing. 
(f) The possession of 500 grams of marijuana is a drug trafficking offence. 
(g) In the offence of Sacrilege, the expression 'Place of Divine Worship' is restricted to churches 
of established religions' 
(h) It is a legal presumption that upon proof that a child is under 12 yem·s he is incapable of 
committing a crime. 
(i) In law the term viva voce evidence means indispu table evidence given by an expert . 
(j) Illega lly obtained evidence is still admissible at court . 
(a) 
(1 mark each) 
The admissibility of evidence at court embraces what is known as the 'Best Evidence 
Rule'. 
Name four (4) circtunstances under which secondary evidence may be admitted. 
(8 marks) 
(b) Where a defendant fails to appear in court on the date of his case, Section 44 of the 
Summm·y Offences Act Chapter 4:20 authorizes a magistrate to do one of three things . One 
of these is that the magistrate may issue a warrant for the defendant. 
Nmne the other two (2) options. 2 marks) 
(a) Define the term 'offensive weapon' under the criminal law. (6 marks) 
(b) Define any two (2) of the following terms under the Praedial Lm·ceny Act Chapter 10:03 
(i) Constable . 
(ii) Farmer's Registration Card . 
(iii) Livestock. 
(4 marks) 
2 



7. Section 27 (1) of the Domestic Violence Act Chapter 45:56 provides that notwithstanding the Bail 
Act, where the court is required to determine whether to grant bail in respect of an offence under the 
said Act, the court shall take four factors into consideration. 
Describe these four (4) factors. (10 marks) 
8. A young woman, who had recently been released from prison for a series of thefts, was sitting on a 
park bench one evening when she overheard a group of friends conversing on the topic of home 
security. As the friends continued to speak, she heard one of them state that he only keeps business 
cards in his wallet and secures his cash in the front pocket of his pants, and he patted his right front 
pocket. About thirty minutes later the friends parted, and the young woman noticed that the man who 
had mentioned that he secures his cash in his pants pocket walked in a different direction to his 
friends . On seeing this, the young woman decided to employ her pick pocketing skills and remove 
whatever cash the man had in his pocket. She quickly manoeuvred herself to a position alongside the 
man and pretended to accidentally bump into him as she walked by. In the process, she deftly 
inserted her hand into the right front pocket of his pants in order to steal his cash. However, there 
was a police officer at the park who knew of her criminal past and he had been keeping a watchful 
eye on her. As she moved away from the man the police officer apprehended her and alerted the man 
to his observation . The man told the police officer that his pockets had been empty and that he had 
not suffered any loss. Notwithstanding this infonnation, the police officer took the young woman to 
the station and charged her for attempted larceny. 
Can the young woman be convicted for the offence for which she was charged? 
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer. (10 marl<:s) 
9. One day a man who had previous convictions for firearm related offences, was walking along a street 
when he observed two men in a scuffle at the side of the roadway. As he approached, he recognized 
that one of the men was a "plain clothes" policeman from the district station. As he got closer to the 
scene, he noticed that each man had a firearm in his hand and they were struggling to point the 
weapon at each other. The man observed that the police officer lost the grip on his firearm and it fell 
to the ground. At that point, he rushed forward, took up the firearm and fatally shot the other rnar1 in 
his chest. 
For what offence, if any, can the man be charged and subsequently convicted? 
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer. (10 marks) 
3 



10. A young woman recently told her lover that she performed a do-it-yourself pregnancy test on herself 
and the result showed that she was pregnant. She told him that her father would be furious with her 
as she had just been accepted at a prestigious university and a child could complicate things for her. 
The man agreed that a pregnancy would cause problems since he was married, but said that he knew 
that she was a religious person and that they would face things together. The next day he gave her a 
glass with a liquid mixture to drink, saying that he got it from a pharmacist, and that it would help her 
with any upset feeling that she may experience during the early stages of pregnancy. In fact, the 
mixture was a concoction intended to cause a miscaniage. Later that evening, the young woman 
suffered an allergic reaction to the mixture and was rushed to the hospital. During the interview with 
the doctor she confided that she was pregnant but did not wish her father to know about it. The 
doctor's examinat ion of the young woman reveaJed that she was not in fact pregnant as she had 
thought. 
What offence, if any, was committed? 
Discuss full y the reasons for your answer. (10 mark s) 
11. A man who had recently been released from prison for breaking offences was reading a pamphlet 
given to him by local pastor and he pledged to himself that he would change his dishonest lifestyle. 
Later that afternoon as he was walking through a neighbourhood he looked at the members of a 
family outside one of the homes and thought to himself that they looked so rich that they had no idea 
what it was like to be a victim of circumstance. He looked at the house number and noted that it was 
'66' . He then nodded his head and said '666 and 66 is the same ting, dem have to be dealing. I go 
deal with dem in the name of the Lord'. At 9:45pm that night he returned to the area, found house 
number 66 and forced open a door at the back of the house. He packed several expensive items into a 
large bag that he was carrying and quietly exited via his point of entry. As he was walking away from 
the scene he reflected on the readings in the pamphlet that he read earlier and decided to return the 
items. He sneaked back into the house and replaced every item that he had taken and quietly left the 
house. However, a neighbour who had seen him enter on the second occasion had summoned the 
police and he was held by the patrolmen as he was walking away from the premises. 
What offence, if any, was committed? 
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer. (10 marks) 
12. During the execution of a search wan-ant at the home of a man one day, the police discovered a small 
quantity of damp cannabis sativa leaves in the garbage tmder the kitchen sink. When questioned, the 
owner of the house explained that her herbalist had recommended that she should drink tea brewed 
from the leaves of the Cannabis sativa leaf as a remedy for a severe breathing disorder from which 
she suffered. She produced a paper written by the herbalist in which the belief was expressed that the 
tea, used in small quantities once weekly, would cure the disorder in time. The woman in fact had a 
small container with Cannabis sativa leaves in her kitchen cupboard labelled "for medicinal purposes 
only". 
Can the woman be prosecuted for any offence? 
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer. (10 marks) 
4 



13. On the night of their wedding a couple went to a resort to spend their honeymoon . After settling in at 
the resort the wife took a shower and retired to bed. The husband roused her and said that it was time 
to consummate the maniage. She refused and told him that she was tired and he should let her rest. 
He then asked her whether she knew the song "I pay for this, I pay for that!" and said that he paid for 
her and it was lawful to consummate a marriage . He proceeded to have sexual intercourse with her 
and as she struggled to get him off her body, he remarked that he never knew that she liked it rough . 
Can the man be prosecuted for any offence? 
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer. (10 marks) 
14. One night a man named Joe was walking along a dimly lit road when he was suddenly confronted by 
a man wielding a piece of wood who ordered him to stand still and hand over all his money . Joe 
started to cry and told his attacker that earlier that day he had lost his job as he was blamed for an 
accident at work; his girlfriend had also broken off their relationship since she was not interested in 
unemployed men, and he was just thrown out of a restaurant due to his lack of cash and non 
acceptance of his credit card. He added that he had just been bitten by a dog and felt like life had 
nothing more to offer him now that he was going to be beaten and with no money to hand over. On 
hearing tlus, the would-be attacker told Joe that life still had hope and he gave Joe some money 
telling him to buy something to eat. However, a passerby had seen the earlier confrontation and 
called the police. The man was held as he was leaving the scene . 
What offence, if any, has been committed by the man? 
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer. (10 marks) 
END 
5 



