2006 POLitE lXllMINllTION FOR PROMOTION 
TO TdE RANK OF tORPORlll 
SUBJECT: LAW 
DATE: 27111 May 2006 
TJME ALLOWED : 2 T lours 
THIS PAPER CONTAINS 14 QUESTIONS. CANDIDATES ARE REQUIRED TO 
ANSWER ANX 10 QUESTIONS. 
QUESTIO NS ANSWERED IN EXCESS OF TEN WILL NOT.BE ASSESSED 
1. 
2. 
(a) List the essential ingredients to prove the offence of Perjury. 
(3 niarks) 
(b) SADIE had been charged for a serious offence and the matter is due to start in the 
court next month . SADIE mentioned to her ex-boyfriend BAZZO that things were 
looking bad for her because there was no one to vouch for her whereabouts at the 
time of the crime . She told him that she was innocent, but no one believes her. 
BAZZO told SADIE that she was still number one to him and she would have the 
alibi she needed. The next day BAZZO went to a Commissioner of Affidavits and 
made a sworn declaration the contents of which would provide the alibi SADIE 
needed. The police found out what BAZZO did and charged him for perjury. 
(a) 
What arc the chances of a conviction for this offence? 
answer. 
Give reasons for your 
(7 mark s) 
What are the ingredients necessary to prove a charge of Larceny Servant ? 
(4 m a rks) 
(b) FRANKLYN ope rates a sma ll store with MONICA as his main ass istant. One day 
FRANKLYN left to go for a trim at the barber shop, and told MON ICA to take 
charge of things . While FRANKLYN was out MARLENE and MARLON came 
by to leave some money for him towards a function for the end of next week. As 
FRANKLYN was not there they left the money with MONICA for him. When 
FRANKLYN returned MONICA did not tell him about the money she collected 
on his behalf. Instead, she kept it for herself and paid some debts she owed. 
FRANKLYN later found out what she did and reported the matte r to the police . 
MONICA was later charged for embezzlement. 
What are the chances of a conviction for this offence? Give reasons for your 
answer. (6 ma rks) 
1 



3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
2006 POLICE CORPORAL LAW (MAIN) 
(a) Define what an "Assault" is under the criminal law. (3 marks) 
(b) Defme '~Battery" under the criminal law. (3 marks) 
(c) HENRY was driving his new motor car one day when suddenly MASON'S car 
tyre got a blow-out and he crashed into HENRY'S car. HENRY came out of his 
car and started calling MASON all sorts of names as MASON tried to calm him 
down saying it was not his fault. HENRY persisted with the name calling and 
MASON reached into his car and drew a gun which he pointed at HENRY and 
asked "What more important the car of your life?" HENRY remained silent and 
began to tremble. MASON then walked away. A patrol car was passing and 
HENRY reported the incident. The police caught up with MASON and he 
laughed and showed them the gun saying that it was only a toy. In fact, it was a 
toy gun. When HENRY was told of this, he felt ashamed and felt that the police 
should still charge MASON for something. 
Can MASON be charged for any offence? Give reasons for your answer. 
(4 marl<s) 
(a) Appendix A to the Judges' Rules lists five principles. Name them. (5 marks) 
(b) Appendix B of the Judges' Rules provides guidelines for the interrogatiop of 
(a) 
children and young persons. What are these guidelines? (5 marks) 
State the words of the warning that must be administered to drivers in accordance 
with section 73 (1) of the Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Act Ch. 48:50. 
(4 mar·J<s) 
(b) Based on infom1ation rece ived, Constable SMART went to a location where he 
found BUTLER slumped over the steering wheel of a motor car that 11ad collided 
with a fence. BUTLER smelled strongly of alcohol. He looked up, saYJ Constable 
SMART anq said in a slurred speech "Boss, is not me was driving". BUTJ--ER 
was charged for Driving while under the ipfluence of alcohol. 
What are the chances of a conviction? Give reasons for your answer. 
(6 marJ<s) 
St(}te whether the persons in the following cirq.1mstances can be convicted for the 
offences for which they were charged: Give brief reasons for your answers. 
(2 m~rks each) 
a. OZZJE ent~rs RAY'S home and s~es him lyipg on the bed. Believing that 
RAY is asleep OZZIE decapitates him . OZZIE is later charged for 
murder. 
b. YVETTE and her brother TOM were quarrelling at their home when 
YVETTE made. use of obscene language to his aJU"lOyanc~. Constable 
KEENE ch1:1rgecj. her for the offence. 
c. ALPHA is a carpenter of 15 years standing. He was stopped in a 
roadblock at around 1 :00 am one morning and said that h~ was ~oing 
home from the airpprt. However implements for housebreaking were 
foun~ in his car trunk and he was charged for Possession of House 
Breaking Implements, 
2 



2006 POLICE CORPORAL LAW (MAIN) 
d. As KARLOS was about to issue a ticket to WENDY for a traffic 
violation, she offered him $ 100.00 to forego the charge. She was arrested 
and prosecuted for Offering a Bribe to ct Police Officer. 
e. Sharon had approached SLY for narcotics and he sold to her as a narcotic 
a substance that he had in his possession. B:owever , Sly knew that the 
substance was tn fact a piece of harmless bush. SLY is arrested and 
cha rged fot a natcotic ... related offence . 
7 List five categories of persons who may apply for a protection orde r under the Domestic 
Violence Act. (10 marks) 
8. PABLO was a drug dealer in the district who wou ld hire several of the unemploye d 
persons in the area to distribute his illic it drugs . Recently the police held several 
exercises and most of his drug runners were in jail. THOMAS PIPER, a petty thief was 
down and out so he apptoached PABLO to make a run for him. When l> ABLO told 
PIPER that time was crucial with his deliveries and PIPER replied "No problema". 
PABLO gave PIPER a bag with 25 grams of heroin to drop to a location . PIPER'S 
actions oh the way raised suspicions and the police held him with t{le drugs. However, 
due to an accident on the road there was a huge traffic pile up. At the station when the 
officers were reporting to the act ing corporal in charge, he heard them mention about the 
traffic situation on the road, and told them yes they can charge him for possession for the 
purpose of trafficking . 
What arc the cha nces of a conviction for this offence? Discuss fully the reasons for your 
answer. (10 marks) 
9. JEAN and DINAH were always calling out to VALENTINE telling him how they 
admired him and he could father nice chi ldren . VALENTINE did not accept these 
comments as complimentary, given thl! reputation of the women who spent most of their 
time on the streets hustling money for favours. One day VALENTINE was feeling a bit 
tipsy from drinking some vodka, and he sat in his car and fell asleep. He awoke sometime 
after only to discover that he had been stripped of his clothes, and JEAN was on top of 
him having sex, while DINAH had his hand placed on the inside of her legs . He told 
them to stop and leave him alone, but they subdued him and continued until they were 
satisfied . VALENTINE felt that his body had been violated and he made a report to the 
police. JEAN and DINAH were subsequently arrested and charged for rape. 
What are the chances of a conviction for this offence? Discuss fully the reason for your 
an~wcr (lOmarks) 
I 0. The recent setting of explos ive devices in the c ity captured CRACKER'S attention. He 
had an uncanny fascination in view ing the aftermath of explosions . CRACKER 
considered those incidents the work of amateurs, since injuries to persons were minimal. 
He resolved to put together a device that would be a 'work of art' . Using his chemistry 
background he made some gunpowder, but he had not yet completed the rest of the 
device. CRAC KER knew that he did not have the courage to plant the completed device, 
but figured that through his contacts he could get someone to do it and remain 
anonymous . However, well before he was able to finish the device the police carried out 
a raid at his home and seized CRACKER'S unfinished work 
Can CRACKER be charged for any offence? Discuss fully the reasons for your answer. 
(lOmarks) 
3 



2006 POLICE CORPORAL LAW (MAIN) 
11. About two months ago, Pastor SINGH told the members of his church that he had 
acquired the permission of the principal of the primary school in the district, to hold their 
Sunday services in two large classrooms at the schooL Since then they have been 
carrying out their worship there, and the contributions made by the congregation are 
stored in a cabinet at the principal's office at the end of each service . JEREMIAH, who 
had been caught stealing from the church on many occasions, found out where the 
weekly collections were being kep t. Last Thursday around 7.00 pm he broke the window 
to the principal's office, prized open the cabinet drawer and removed the sum of 
$9,800 .00 in cash that was secured as the collection from the church services. However, 
his fingerprints were found on the scene and he was arrested by detectives and charged 
for sacrilege . 
What are the chances of a conv iction for this offence? Discuss fully the reasons for your 
answer (lOmarks) 
12. LARRY, MOE and CURLEY were broke and out of work. For the past week they had 
been sitting in the park watching HARRIETTE and the hours that she would go for walks 
and return. They discussed the possibility of robbing HARRIETTE since she kept on her 
jewels even when she took her walks . One day when MOE was by himself in the park, he 
observed that HARRIETTE left for her walk earlier than usual. BY this time he had 
gotten desperate for some funds, so he took a shortcut through a track and came out 
further up the road abead of HARRIETTE. MOE approached HARRIETTE and told her 
not to move . He told her that his f1iends were watching from a hiding place and if she 
made a false move she would get hllli . He told her to pass over her money and jewels and 
she did so as she became scared for her life . MOE then ran off. The police later held 
LARRY, MOE and CURLEY and cha rged them for Robbery with AggTavation. 
What are the chances of a convict ion for this offence? Discuss fully the reasons for your 
answer. (lOmarks) 
13. Around 8:15 pm one night DON was plying his taxi in the Arouca area when he picked 
up FRANK, JESSIE and COLE as passengers who asked to be taken to Valencia. On 
reaching Valencia, JESSIE placed an object at DON'S neck and ordered him to sit in the 
back seat. They then took him to Rio Claro where FRANK and JESSIE stayed with him 
while COLE left saying that the event had gone too far and he no longer wanted any part 
of it. DON told the other two that his fam ily did not have much money but they vyould 
pa;! as mi1ch as they have for his release. FRA1~K told DON that it was j4st a het that 
they had among themse lves and they were not demanding any money fo11 his release. 
JESSIE then told DPN that he was free to leave. DON ran to the police statipn and tnade 
a r~port. FRANK, JESSIE and COLE were later j;harged for kidnapping. 
What are the chances of a conviction for this om;;mce? Discuss fully the reasons for your 
an$wer (lOmarks) 
14. Sf\NDRA finished work late at the hospita l one pight and was walking towards her car in 
the parki•1g lot when HACKER confront ed her and demanded her money. SANPRA 
refused and asked him why he did qot go and look for a job . HACKER sucked his teeth 
and grabbed SANORA'S handbag then fled the scene. As he was making his escape 
SANDRA remembered the nt.tmber of hold-ups that had taken place recen~ly and stood 
motionless in fear. Forlunately, tpe watchm&n h&d noticed and called the police . 
HACKER was held in an alley with the hapdbag and its contents. HA~KER was ch?rged 
for the offence of Robbery with Aggravation. 
What are the chanc~s of q convictio11 for this offence? Discuss fully the reasons for your 
ai1$Wer (lOm~trks) 
4 



2006 POLICE EXAMINATION FOR PROMOTION 
TO THE RANK OF CORPORAL 
S"'UPPLE~NTAT , 
I 
UBJECT : LAW 
DATE: 27TH October 2006 
TIME ALLOWE D: 2 Ho urs 
INSTRUtTIONS: 
This paper contains fourteen (14) questions. tandidates are reqUired to answer any teh (10) 
quesfiohs). 
NB: Wllere more than ten (tO) questions are answered onlY the nrst ten (tO) will be mftrked. 
Tlte pass mark lor this paper ls lillY (50) marks. 
/ (a) List five categories of persons who are exempted under section 7 (I) of the 
Firearms Act as it relates to having a firearm or ammunition in their possession. 
2. 
(5 marks) 
(b) SALLY'S husband BERT who had a licensed firearm died recently . SALLY'S 
cousin MARK approached her to buy the firearm since she did not want it in her 
house anymore. MARK told her that his application for a licence had been turned 
down but with the way business persons were coming under attack these days, he 
needed some protection. SALLY agreed and she sold him the gun at what she 
considered a fair price, and advised him that he should enroll in a gun club and re­
apply. 
Can SALLY be charged for any offence? Give reasons for your answer. 
(5 marks) 
(a) Clause five (5) of Appendix A to the Judges' Rules gives guidelines on the 
interrogation of foreigners. What are these guidelines? (6 marks) 
(b) Rule Five of the Judges' Rules deals with the manner in which written statements 
after caution should be taken. What does paragraph (f) of this rule state with 
respect to a person who refuses to sign the statement? (4 marks) 
3. ~ Explain the difference between the offence of "Assault" and the offence of 
"Battery". (6 marks) . 
(b) BOLO and his team were playing a football match on the field in the district 
tournament. About three minutes before the end of the first half TWINKLE 
TOES, the star striker on the other team, scored a goal putting the score at 3 goals 
to nil. As play resumed TWINKLE TOES received the ball again and was 
heading to score when BOLO tackled him hard from behind causing TWINKLES 
to fall and hurt himself. When the match was over TWINKLE TOES went to the 
police station and reported the incident. BOLO was subsequently charged for 
Assault by Beating. 
What are the chances of a conviction for this offence? Give reasons for your 
answer. (6 marks) 







5. 
6. 
2006 POLICE CORPORAL LAW (Suppl.) 
(a) Name five (5) Drug Trafficking offences. (5 mat"ks) 
(b) The police got inforniatiort that JUAN CARLOS Was operating aS a drug pushet 
in the St. James area. Detectives HART and SOULE wete dispatched on patrol to 
pw-sue the infotmation. From a concealed spot, they observed JUAN CARLOS 
give a small bag, whkh they suspected to contain drugs, to SHAKEY a known 
junkie in the area. When liART and SOULE were satisfied that they had seen 
enough, they catne out of their vantage })oint and held JUAN CARLOS. I)etective 
SOULE pursued SHAKEY and held hitn a short distance away. On searching the 
bag that SHAKEY had the officers found t1ve (5) grams of cocaine. However , 
when they searched JUAN CARLOS, no drugs were found on him. 
(a) 
Can JUAN CARLOS be charged for any offence? Give reasons for yout answer. 
(6 marks) 
Defme the term 'Court' in accordance with section 3 of the Bail Act No. 18 of 
1994. (5 marks) 
(b) BETTY'S son GERONIMO was charged for robbery and was detained at the 
state prison. His birthday was coming up this weekend and BETTY did not want 
him to spend it in jail. BETTY did not have the documents to secure bail for her 
son, but she heard that there were persons who could assist her for a fee . To this 
end, she met MAVERICK who said that he would risk taking the bail if she 
would compensate him. They negotiated and eventually agreed on his fee to stand 
as a surety to secure bail for GERONIMO. However, after BETTY paid 
MAVERICK his fee MAVERICK did not fulfill his end of the anangement. 
BETTY'S neighbour FERDI fow1d out about the transaction, and made a report at 
the police station. 
Can any criminal_ charges be brought against BETTY and/or GERONIMO? Give 
reasons for your answer. (5 marks) 
(a) State the provisions of section 73 (1) of the Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Act 
Ch. 48:50. (6 marks) 
(b) FORDE got impatient in the line of traffic and steered his car out of the line to overtake 
the vehicles in front of him and catch the green light first. As FORDE was proceeding 
alongside the line of traffic KIM suddenly emerged from between the cars and FORDE 
swerved his car to the right to avoid collision with her. FORDE lost control and his car 
ran into THELMA'S Volvo that was parked at the side of the road. FORDE was 
subsequently charged for Dangerous Driving. However, the requirements of section 73 
(1) of the Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Act Ch. 48:50 were not met. 
State what must be proved in order for FORDE to be convicted of the offence in such a 
situation . 
(4 marks) 
~MARGARET was standing at the curb awaiting transportation to go home . She started to 
feel thirsty and went to a nearby shop to purchase a beverage. When she attempted to pay 
for the item she realized that her money had dropped from her in the street. She looked 
out the glass door and saw her $20.00 bill on the pavement. She started to walk towards 
the spot to retrieve the bill when she saw BLADE a notorious thief picking up the money. 
She became afraid and made efforts to avoid being noticed by BLADE. When BLAD E 
left U1e scene, MARGARET went to the police station and made a report. BLADE was 
held and charged for robbery. 
What are the chances of a conviction for this offence? Discuss fully the reasons for your 
answer. (10 m ar ks) 
2 
{ 







I 
2006 POLICE CORPORAL LAW (Suppl.) 
..S~E and HARVEY work together at an insurance company at Chaguanas . Around 
12:50 pm one day a telepho ne call came for JOE but he was out on a job with a client. 
HARVEY, who was alone at the o:ffic~, accepte d the call on his behalf. The call came 
from the school that JOE'S daughter attends indicating that she had taken ill and her 
father was required urgently . HARVEY immediately took up the keys to JOE'S car and 
drove to the school, where he took up the child and conveyed her to a medic al institution . 
When .TOE retw-ned to his office he discovered his car missing, and made a report to the 
police. HARVEY was intercepted by a patrol when He was returning to the office to meet 
JOE and update him on the events. The police are considering charging HARVEY for 
taking the vehicle without the conSent of the owner . 
Can HARVEY advanc e any justification for his actions? Expla in full y the reasons for 
your answer. (10 marks) 
JENNY secured her house artd went to bed at 10:00 pm on Tuesday night. The night was 
humid and at around 11:45 pm she got up and wen t to l1er kitchen for a glass of water . 
When she returned to her bedroom she noti ced someone' s hand holding her Rolex watch 
and her Motorola Razor cellular phone going out of a window that had just been broken. 
She made an alarm and GUY was held with the items fleeing the scene. He was later 
charged for bw-glary. 
What are the chance s of a conv iction for this offence? Discuss fully the reason for your 
answer (lOmarks) 
10. MABEL, a single parent, has five young children the eldest being 15 years of age. From 
time to time she gets work with the Unemployment Relief Programme, but most times 
she wQuld take up a position near to a fast food outlet with some of her children. She puts 
them to sit together next to a paper bag telling them they are not to ask anyone fot 
money, but just sit looking sad and persons with conscience would help them by putting 
money in the bag. A proprietor at one of the locations got concerned for the children and 
reported the matte r to the police . 
Can MABEL be charged for any offen ce in relation to her actions? Discuss fully the 
reasons for your answer. (lOmarks) 
ROGERS operates a shoe store at High Street, Prince s Town. MYRA is employed at the 
store as a cashier. One day after the days sales were checked, ROGERS made up the 
deposit and gave MYRA an envelope with $3,200.00 cash and $2,000.00 in cheques to 
deposit at the bank as usual . MYRA realized that ROGERS hardly verified the deposits 
as he left that up to her. On that occasion she decided to take a chance and keep some of 
the cash for herself: because in any case she would consider it a bonus. MYRA then 
removed $500.00 from the envelope and deposited the rest. One week later ROGERS 
reconciled his accounts and discovered the shortage . A report was made to the police and 
MYRA was subsequently charged for Embezzlement. 
What are the chances of a conviction for this offence? Discuss fully the reasons for your 
answer (l Omarks) 
3 







I 
2006 POLICE CORPORAL LAW (Suppl.) 
~ RAQUEL was going home from the grocery store o11e evening when PERVIN called out 
to her and asked for help. He told her that he was looking after his cousin's baby and the 
pampet needs to change. RAQUEL agreed to assist and she entered the house. PERVIN 
then told her that he was the baby who Wanted his pamper changed and RAQUEL asked 
him why he was so foolish . PEltVIN suddenly pushed RAQUEL to the grotrnd and 
removed her clothes. l-Ie then rubbed the palm of his hand over her body and inserted 
some of his fingers irtto bet anl.ls. RAQUEL struggled and pulled away from him. 
PERVlN told RAQUEL that he Would not tell anyon e if she did the same. RAQUEL 
snatched up her clothes and reported the matter to the police . PERVIN was subsequently 
charged for buggery . 
What are the chances of a conviction for this offence? Discuss fully the reasons for yout 
answer (lOmarks) 
~OIIN was walking home o11e night when ACE and JOKER approached him and asked 
him the time. JOHN asked them what they were up to whereupon ACE held on to his 
neck and squeezed while JOKER searched his pockets and took his wallet. Joker then 
pushed. him to the ground and they both ran off. JOHN f!lade his way to. the station and 
made a report. ACE and JOKER were held the same night. When asked how much 
money was stolen JOHN said that he had $140.00 in his wallet. The officer on duty then 
directed that ACE and JOKER be charge d for Larceny from the Person given the amount 
of money involved. 
Do you agree w1th this charge? Discuss fully the reasons fot' your answer 
(lOmarks) 
4. SONNY was cooking in his back yard as he was expecting a group of friends from the 
office to visit him. He looked at his drinks and though t that he should get an extra case of 
beers and a bottle of whiskey . He left his home open in case anyone came and walked 
briskly to the mini mart at the corner to purchase the items he wanted. :DAN saw wheh 
SONNY left and he ran into the house and took SONNY,S DVD player and CD player 
from the house and ran outside . At that time two of SONNY'S friend s were arriving and 
they became suspicious and stopped DAN in the street. SONNY arrived moments later 
and DAN was taken to the poli ce station and charged for House Breakin g and Larceny. 
What are the chance s of a conviction for this offence? Discuss fully the reasons for your 
answer (lOmarks) 
END OF PAPER 
4 



