(_,) 
2009 POli[E PROMOTION (SIJPPlEMENTAl) EWIINATION 
TO THE RANI OF [ORPORAl 
SUBJECT: LAW 
DATE: 10
1
h November, 2009 
TIME ALLOWED: 2Yz Hours 
INSTRUCT ION S: 
THIS PAPER CONTAINS FOURTEEN (14) QUESTIONS , CANDIDAT ES ARE 
REQUIRED TO ANSWER ANY TEN (10) QUESTIONS. 
NB. WHERE MORE THAN TEN (10) QUESTI ONS ARE ANSWERED, ONLY THE 
FIRST TEN (10) WILL BE ASSESSE D. 
l. Name five (5) conditions that must be satisfied before a dying declaration may be 
admitted in evidence in a court of Jaw. 
(10 mark s) 
2 State the meaning of any two (2) of the following terms under Section 2 of the 
Negotiable Instruments (Dishonoured Cheques) Act No. 9 of 1998 as amended . 
(i) Dishonoured cheque . 
(ii) Drawer. 
(iii)Services . 
(Smarks each) 
3. (a) It is a genera l rule that the prosecution is required to call all the evidence, 
which it intends to rely on before the close of its case . 
Name three exceptions to th is rule. (6 mark s) 
(b) Define the term "arrestable offence ." (4 marl< s) 
4. (a) Name four (4) actions a court can take when a defendant does not appear in 
court on the date of his case. (4 mark s) 
(b) Define the offence of"conspiracy" . (6 mark s) 
5. (a) Exp lain what is meant by a "lead ing question" . (3 marks ) 
(b) Explain what is meant by the term "hostile witness ." (3 marks ) 
(c) What is a "no case submiss ion?" (4 marks) 
1 



I -



6. 
r 
a. Name five (5) forms of cruelty under the Children's Act Chapter 46:01. 
(5 marks) 
b. You are the Second Division Officer in charge at the station when a Constable 
comes to you and asks for some advice . She tells you that she received 
information that the proprietor of a small shop in the area is in the habit of selling 
cigarette paper to persons who appear to be under the age of sixteen years. The 
constable further reveals that she told her informant that the most the police could 
do in such instances was to use the aspect of commtmity policing strategy in order 
to discourage those young persons from engaging in that habit. 
Do you agree with the Constable? 
Give a brief reason for your answer. (5 marks) 
7 (a) You are on duty at the station when a man comes in and states that he wants to 
sttrrender his firearm . 
Name fou r ( 4) requirements that you must ensure are fulfilled when a Firearm 
Users Licence holder surrenders a firearm . (4 marks) 
(b) State what is meant by a "restr icted person" under the Firearm Act Chapter 16:01 
as amended. (6 marks) 
8. There was a report of fire in your district in which a house and its contents were all 
destroyed, in addition to, two vehicles owned by the family . You conducted enquiries 
and submitted a report, but on the completion of the enquiries you were asked to check 
whether the vehicles were still on the Licensing Authority's records. Eleven months after 
the fire, the vehicles were still on the records. You interviewed the owner of the vehicles 
and he tells you "Boss I don lost them vehicles already, so forget dat." 
Explain to the owner his legal obligation in accordance with Section 15 (2) of the Motor 
Vehicle and Road Traffic Act Chapter 48:50 as amended and state whether any action 
can be taken against him. (10 marks) 
9. An elderly lady approached a man who advertised a three bedroom house for rent and 
negotiated a monthly rental. They executed a lease and she paid one month's rental fee, 
promising that she would pay six months in advance when her son took up residence at 
the premises. At the end of the first month the lady told the landlord that her son was 
delayed and enquired whether he would accept a cheque for the next two months as 
payment to which he agreed. She then issued him a cheque to cover the two months rent. 
The man deposited the cheque but payment was not honoured. When he referred the 
matter to the lady she made an excuse and told him to hold the cheque until she advised 
him further . At the expiration of the two months the matter had not been settled and she 
was then refusing to make any further payments to him since she was then contending 
that she was a tenant at will. The man has just reported the matter to your station. 
For what offence, if any, can the lady be charged? 
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer (10m arks) 
2 







10. A known pickpocket had just completed a term at the state's expense . However, once 
again he was up to his old tricks. One day while buying fried chicken, he ·:>bserved a gold 
chain fastened to a man's waist and leading into his hip pocket. He cc,uld not readily 
detect what was at the end of the chain, but though t to himself it must be valuable. He 
pulled the chain from the man's pocket and saw a watch at the end of it. He grasped the 
watch and continued to pull the chain but the other end was still fastened to the man's 
waist. A passerby seeing the incident held on to the pickpocket and carried him to the 
police station . 
What offence, if any, was committed? 
Discuss fully the reasons for yom- answe r. (lOmarl<s) 
11. Don had an altercation with a f riend Vernon. A few days after this Don saw Vernon 
liming on the street corner. Don jumped on his motorcycle, sped towards the spot where 
Vernon was stand ing and struck him with the motorcycle causing injuries to Don's side 
and back. As a result of these injuries you are detailed to investigate th[s incident as a 
road traffic accident. 
What offence, if any, did Don comm it? 
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer. (lOmarks) 
12. A man had been charged for the offence of rape. At his trial the defence cited four 
witnesses to give evidence that would support the case of the defence that the 
complainant (victim) was in the habit of providing sexual services for a fee. 
Discuss fully the chances of these witnesses giving testimony for the defer.ce. 
(lOrnarks) 
13. PECK had been watching the way GREGORY was showing off his cages with birds and 
boasting that he has the best in the country . PECK decided to teach GREGORY a lesson . 
On Thursday night when GREGORY went inside his living room to listen to the 
9 o'clock news PECK climbed up to the gallery and stole two cages with expensive 
birds. On Friday PECK was held with the birds and cages and he was charged for 
burglary. 
What are the chances of a conviction for this offence? 
Discuss fully the reasons for your answe r. (10 marks ) 
14. A man and his wife live in an expensive apartment in a gated community in Tobago . 
Last Monday at 5:00am she drove him to the airport to catch a 7:30am flight to Mexico 
on a five-day business semina r. However, because of an outbreak of the swine flu, the 
seminar was cancelled at the last minute. The man decided that he would travel home by 
taxi instead of bothering his wife to make a second journey to the airport. He bought a 
box of chocolates and a rose for his wife and planned to lay them on the bed beside her 
sleeping body. At 9:00 am he arrived at his home and fm.md his wife in bed mal<ing love 
to her gym instructor. The man looked at him with a grin on his face and 5aid "Yuh must 
call first meh boy." The man got his licenced firearm and shot the gym im:tructor several 
times. He was later charged for murder. 
Discuss fully whether the accused has any defence available . (lOmarks) 
END 
3 







2008 POU[E PROMOTION (MAIN) EWIINATION 
TO TIE RANI OF tORPORAl 
SUBJECT: LAW 
DATE: Saturday 318T May 2008 
TIME ALLOWED: 2Yz Hours 
INSTRUCTIONS: 
TillS PAPER CONTAINS FOURTEEN (14) QUESTIONS, CANDIDATES ARE 
JU:QUIRED TO ANSWER ANY TEN (10) QUESTIONS. 
NB. WHERE MORE THAN TEN (10) QUESTIONS ARE ANSWERED, ONLY THE 
FIRST TEN (10) WILL BE ASSESSED. 
l. Section 5 (9) of the Dangerous Drugs Act as amended provides that a person in 
possession of more than a specified weight of dangerous drugs is deemed to have the 
dangerous drug for the purpose of trafficking. 
Name the types of dangerous drugs and state the weight specified in relation to each. 
(10 mark s) 
2. (a) State the meaning of any five (5) of the following legal terms: 
(i) 1\ccomplice 
(ii) Autrefois convict 
(iii) Autrefois aquit 
(iv) Sub-judice 
(v) Ex-parte or 
(vi) Prima facie 
(10 mark s) 
3. Section 3 of the Criminal Law Act Ch. 10:04 gives powers of arrest without warrant in 
4. 
5. 
four certain circumstances. Name them. (2Yz marks each) 
(a) Name four (4) exceptions to the rule against the admissibility of hearsay 
evidence. (4 marks) 
(b) Name three (3) inchoate offences . (6 mark s) 
(a) State the words of the caution under Rule (3) ofthe Judges' Rules. (5 mark s) 
(b) A suspect has made a written statement. Having read it, the suspect refuses to 
write the prescribed certificate at the end of the statement or to sign it. What are 
the requirements of Rule (3) (f) of the Judges' Rules in such circumstances? 
(5 marks) 



6. 
7 (a) 
State whether the following statements are true or false: (2 marks each) 
a. A man cannot be convicted of raping his wife. 
b. All indictable offences are also arrestable offences . 
c. Persons above the age of sixtee n years can lawfully purchase alcohol. 
d. A Time Allowed Commitment warrant can be executed at anytime and 
place. 
e. The "least touching" whatsoever will constitute a battery under the 
criminal law. 
Name five (5) offences under the Forgery Act Chapter I 1:13. (5 marks) 
(b) What are the essential ele ments that must exist to lay a charge of unlawful 
possession? (5 marks) 
8. You have been given instructions to prosecute an offender for the offence of assault by 
beating. State the type of complaint that you should use and the time period for laying 
such charge. 
List seven items of information that the complaint must contain. (10 marks) 
9. One day while a policeman was on foot patrol, he visited the high schoo l in the area as 
part of his routine and checked with the security officers. One of the security officers 
(a woman) pointed to a young man who was standing obliquel y opposite the school 
premises and told the constable that she was of the view that the young man had 
marijuana on him. The constab le approached the young man and upon searching him 
found twelve hand-rolled cigarettes weighing 50 grams in a bag that the young man had 
in his trouser pocket. The young man told the officer that it was "shining bush" and that 
he used it for the cold and fever. In fact, the content of the cigarettes was "shining bush." 
What offence, if any, can the young man be charged for? 
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer. (lOmarks) 
l 0. At around I 0:00 pm one night a man who had recently been released from prison for a 
series of burglaries, was walking past the village church when he thought to himself that 
he could feel like a king if he drank from a chalice. He eased opened an unlocked 
window on a s ide of the church, and climbed inside. As he was about to grasp the item 
that he was there for, the caretaker entered the room and enquired what he was doing 
there. He replied 'The Lord alone knows' and left through the front door. 
What offence, if any, was committed? 
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer. (lOmarks) 
I I. A man is the owner of a pellet gun which has a smooth bore. One day he got in a state of 
anger over leaves that had dropped into his yard from his neighbour's tree. He called out 
to his neighbour and they met in the street. He pointed the gun at his neighbour and told 
him to raise his hands in the air. He then took aim with his pellet gun and shot his 
neighbour on his right index finger causing an injury. After investigations were made 
you received instructions to charge the man for several offences including the following-
2 



(1) Wounding with intent to do grievous bodily harm 
(2) Possession of a firearm 
(3) Possession of ammunition 
( 4) Possession of a firearm to endanger life 
What are the chances of a conviction for these offences? 
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer. (1 0mark s) 
12. One morning a lady was driving her car on her way to work when as she slowed down to 
cross over a speed-hump in the road, a man reached inside her car window and grasped 
her chain and pendant from around her neck and ran off with the items. She became 
scared and started to cry. She was taken to the police station but was still crying ami 
trembling as she related the facts to the station sentry. 
W11at offence, if any, was committed? 
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer. (lOmarks) 
13. A lady visits your station and describes her soc ial situation. It is indicative of domestic 
violence at the home. She asks for advice on certain issues and is also interested in 
knowing who can apply for a protection order on behalf of a child under the Domestic 
Violence Act. 
Name five such persons. (10 marks) 
14. One evening a young woman went to the mall where she purchased some items. On her 
way home. a young man came alongside her and remarked that he had been admiring her 
for some time and he felt that they would produce nice children together. She smiled and 
said to him "In your dreams". As she walked through a narrow track. he suddenly pulled 
her to the ground and lifted her skirt to perform oral sex on her. However, as his mouth 
rested onto her private part, he heard a noise and Oed the scene. 
What offence, if any, did the man commit? 
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer. (10 marks) 
End of Paper 
3 







2008 POLJ[E PROMOTION (SUPPLEMENTAL) EXAMINATION TO 
THE RANI OF [08PORAl 
SUBJECT : LAW 
DATE : Thursday 28th August, 2008 
liME ALLOWED: 2~ Hours 
INSTRUCTiONS: 
TI-llS PAPER CONTAINS FOURTEEN (14) QUESTIONS, CANDIDATES ARE 
REQ UIRED TO ANSWER ANY TEN (10) QUESTIONS. 
NB. WHE RE MORE THAN TEN (10) QUESTIONS ARE ANSWERED, ONLY T HE 
Fll<ST l'EN (1()) WILL BE ASSESSED. 
I (a) State the words of the caut ion under Ru le 2 of the Judges' Ru les. (5 mark s) 
(b) Rule 5 (c) of the Judges' Rules provides that whe re a person making a statement 
indicates that he wants to write it himse lf, he shall be asked to write out a caution. 
State the words of the caution that the person shall be asked to write. (5 marks ) 
2. Slate the sta tutory time limi t for institut ing proceedings for each of the following 
offences : 
.., 
_) . 
4. 
(i) Fraudulent Conversion (summa ry) 
(ii) House-b reaking and Larceny 
(iii) Embezzlement (summary) 
(iv) Being found by night in possession of house breaking implemen ts 
(v) Obtain ing property by use of a dishonou red cheque 
(2 mark s e ach) 
(a) State the elements necessary to establish the offe nce of burglary . (Smarks ) 
(b) At 9:55 pm one night a thief fo rced open a door to a stranger's home where he 
(a) 
(b) 
sto le several items of expensive jewe llery and left via his point of entry . No one 
was at home at the time. The thief was subsequently held and charged for the 
offence of burglary . 
What are the chances of a conv iction for this offe nce? 
State briefly the reasons for yo u.r answer . (5 marks) 
What is meant by the term "stand ard of proof'? (Smarks) 
What is the "standard of proof" in a c ivil case? (5 mark s) 







5. (a) Explain the meaning of "arTestable offence". (5 m arks) 
(b) Explain the meaning of the term "wound". (5 marks) 
6. State whether the following statements are true or false: 
7 
a) The defence of"provocation" is only avuilable on a charge of murder . 
b) The consent of the Director of Public Prosecutions must be obtained before 
procecd .ings can be initiated for the offe nces Linder the Pc1jury Act. 
c) A hybrid offence is a n offence catered fo r under the f-orestry /\ct. 
d) All offences of robbery are indictable. 
(2 Yz mark s eac h) 
(i.l) Name four (4) ways by which an accused per'son may be identified. (4 marks) 
(b) Name six (6) defences available to a defendant under the criminal law. (6 marks) 
8. 1\ womhn purchased some goods at a store one day and made payment by way of a 
cheque that she dated one month in the future . On the day that the cheque was dated, the 
proprietor deposited it into his bank accoun t. fiowever, the cheque was not honoured for 
payment. The prop rietor came to your s tation and complained that for the past month he 
had bec11 making efforts to have the matter settled with the lady, but she had not made 
guod on her debt. You were at the stat ion when the report was made and you overhea rd 
the sentty telling the proprietor that the facts of his report did not disclose any criminal 
offl:m.:c. 
Do you agree with the view of the sentry? 
Exp lain fully the reasons for your answer. (1 0 marks) 
9. 1\ man's thirteen -year-old daughter lives with him and is enrolled at a Secondary School. 
llowcvcr, sometime ago the father received information that she is an absentee. He had 
repeatedly spoke n to her about her conduct. One morning he flogs her with a strap, 
\Vhich leaves no visible injury on her. She then reports the matter to the community 
police and it is being considered to prosecute him for the offence of"assault by beating". 
Is there any defence availab le to the father? 
Explain fully the reason for your answe r. (10 mark s) 
I 0. Whilst on patrol one day a policeman observed an unusua l bulge on the waist of a man 
who was standing at the roadside. The policeman became suspicious of the bulge and 
approached the man and informed him of his suspicions. When the police officer 
searched the man, he found that the bulge in the man's waist was in fact a starting pistol. 
The policeman asked the man for his permit, whereupon the man replied that he 
sometimes officiated at sports meetings and in any event there was no need for him to 
have a licence for a starting pistol. 
What charge, if any, can be laid against the man? 
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer. (10 marks) 
2 







II . 1\ young lady entered a taxi around 8 o'clock one evenin g to go home . When the car 
reached her area all the other passengers had alighted at their destinations, so that she was 
the lone passenge r. On approaching her stop she paid the fare and told the driver where 
she wanted to stop. However, the driver found her to be rather attractive and thought that 
if she got to know him, she would like him. lie passed her stop and despite her insistence 
that he s(op he continued on the way to take her beyond her destination. But in the face of 
her continued protests he aborted his p lan and stopped the car to explain . The young 
woman ran out of the car and wen t to the police stcHion and made a report. The sentry 
asked her whether the driver had made any demand s on her and she said no. He then told 
her that she was lucky and th<tt all he could do was Warn the taxi driver not to do it again 
us in the' absence of a demand prior to releasin g her, no criminal offence had been 
cstabl is heel. 
What offcm:e, ifahy, was comm itted? 
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer. (10 mark s) 
12. A mother went into the supermarket with hct three year old daughter to shop. The 
daughter wandered away frorh her mothe r while she was checking the shopping list. A 
few moments latet the child returhed with a wallet containing an identification card, 
driver's permit and three hundred dollars in cash. The mother did not know the person 
identified in the wallet. She therefore used the money and handed over the wallet with the 
documents to the cashier at the store. 
Did the mother comm it any offence? 
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer (1 0 mark s) 
13. One day a man went to a party where he met a young woman for the first time with 
whom he sha red company the entire night. As the days passed, they kept in touch and 
soon started to have sexual relations. One day an older relat ive of the girl saw her in the 
company of her male companion and recognized him as the illegitimate son of the girl's 
f<lthcr. He became incensed with the relationship that the girl had with her brother and 
told the girl's mother about the boy. The mother got furious and reported the matter to 
your station for her daughter's new found lover to be prosecuted. 
What offence, if any, was committed? 
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer. 
14. A woman i s in an abusive relationship with her husband. She comes to your station 
seeking advice on what is meant by "conduct amo·unting to emot ional and psychologica l 
abuse" under the Domestic Violence Act. 
N~1mc five (5) examples of such conduct in accordance with the Act. (10 marks ) 
End 
3 



