2010 POLICE PROMOTION (SUPPLEMENTAL) EXAMINATION TO 
THE RANK OF SERGEANT 
SUBJECT: LAW 
DATE: 21st OCTOBER 2010 
TIME ALLOWED: 2 % HOURS 
INSTRUCTIO NS: 
THIS PAPER CONTAINS FOURTEEN (14) QUESTIONS, CANDIDATES ARE 
REQUIRED TO ANSWER ANY TEN (10) QUESTIONS. 
THE PASS MARK IS 50°/o 
N.B. WHERE MORE THAN TEN (10) QUESTIONS ARE ANSWERED, ONLY THE 
FffiST TEN (10) WILL BE ASSESSED. 
2. 
3. 
l. Define any four ( 4) of the follow ing legal terms under the Laws of Evidence : 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(a) 
De novo 
Embracery 
Ex Offic io 
Mute by visitation of God 
Tn flagrante delicto 
(10 mark s) 
Section 3 (1) of the Child ren's Act Chapter 46:01 prescribes certain circumstances under 
which a person who is legally responsible for the maintenance of a child, may be deemed to 
have neglected the child in a manner likely to cause injury to the health of the child . 
State these circumstances . (6 mad< s) 
(b) Define the term 'Place of safety' under Section 2 of the Children's Act Chapter 46:0 I. 
(c) 
(a) 
(2 mark s) 
Define the term 'Minister' under Section 2 ofthe Children's Act Chapter 46:01 . (2 mark s) 
Section 19 (4) of the Evidence Act Chapter 7:02 itemizes eight (8) categories of public 
officers that are class ified as "Government Experts" . 
Name any five (5) of them. (5 marks) 
(b) Name five (5) offences under the Crimina l Law for which the prosecution is not required to 
adduce evidence of the mens rea of the defe ndant. (5 mark s) 



4. Define the following terms under the Dangerous Drugs Act Chapter 11:25-: 
(a) Coca plant. 
(b) Import. 
(c) Opiwn. 
(d) Tenitory. 
(10 marks) 
5. (a) Define the fo llowing terms under Section 3 of the Domestic Violence Act Chapter 45 :56 : 
(i) Financ ial abuse. 
(ii) Member of the household. (6 marks ) 
(b) By virtue of Section 16 of the Domestic Violence Act Chapter 45:56 where a protection or 
interim order has been made or varied by the court, the court shall cause copies of the said 
order to be served upo n three categories of person . 
Name any two (2) ofthese categories . (4 marks) 
6. (a) Section 33 (2) of the Summary Courts Act states "In every case where no time is especially 
limited for making a complaint for a summary offence in the Act relating to such offence, the 
complaint shall be made within six months from the time when the matter of the complaint 
arose, and not after." There me howeve r exceptions to this rule which allow the complaint for 
certain offences under the Summary Offences Act Chapter 11 :02 to be made within twelve 
months. 
Name four (4) such offences . (4 marks) 
(b) Distingu ish between the offences of Larceny from the person and simple robbery . 
(6 marks) 
7. (a) State fully the elements necessa ry to estab lish the common law offence of kidnapping . 
2 
(6 marks) 
(b) Aprui from the offence of kidnapping w1der the Anti-kidnapping Act No 21 of 2003, state 
two (2) other offences under the said Act. (4 mark s) 
8. Whilst on duty at the station one even ing, a junior officer app roached you and asked for advice on a 
rep01i that he had under investigation. He explained that the facts of the report related to the death of 
a wo man who was stabbed by her estrru1ged husband during a row, and that the ten year old daughter 
of the deceased had witnessed the incident. The officer was interested in learning the procedure that 
the court would undertake for the admiss ibility of the girl's evidence at the man's trial. 
Expla in fully the procedure that the court wou ld adopt in taking the evidence of this witness . 
(10 marks) 



.· 
A man who was interested in travelling abroad to participate in a carnival celebration expressed his 
desire to one of his female friends. He confided in her that he had a compulsion to spend money and 
he was certain that he would have problems to accumulate the money without help. He told his friend 
that he wanted to give her the sum of $800.00 per fortnight over a three month period, and asked 
whether she would be willing to hold the money for him until he needed it. She agreed to do so. That 
said day, he entrusted his friend with the sum of $800.00 in cash. However, six days later the man 
approached the woman and told her that he had a situation and that he needed to get his $800.00 
immediately. The woman lamented that she had been approached by a group seeking donations in aid 
of a d isaster stricken country, and when she viewed photographs of the devastation , she had no choice 
other than t.o do the right thing and donate the $800.00 for the cause. She added that she did not have 
money to give him as she did not expect that he wou ld call for the money so soon. The man became 
annoyed and visited your Station to lodge a complaint. 
What offence, if any, did the woman commit? 
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer. (lOmark s) 
l 0. You receive information from a few persons that the janitor at the high school in your district is a 
drug dealer and that he practices his distasteful trade just outside the school. You are also told that he 
is dishonest even in his illicit trade, as on many occasions he has sold his customers common fake 
narcotics. As a result of this infonnation, you decided to check up on the janitor. You positioned 
yourself ncar the school, where you saw him hand ing a man a small bag and telling him "take this, it 
good for yuh as1hma." You approached the janito r, ident ified yourself to him and took the bag he had 
in his hand. On checking you discovered that it was a well known local herb called "jigge r bush" 
which is used for the cold. You are of the opinion that what he said was only an excuse and he was in 
fact selling the "jigger bush" to the unsuspecting customer for marijuana. 
What offence, if any, was committed by the janitor? 
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer. (lOmarks) 
I I. A man came to your station and reported that in March this year he made a downpayment of 
$18,000.00 to a woman towards the purchase of her motor car, which she had agreed to sell at a cost 
of $40,000.00. However, due to a personal emergency he changed his mind and requested a refund of 
the downpayment. The woman agreed to refund him the $40,000.00, and issued him with a cheque for 
the said amount. He later deposited the c heque into his bank account, but it was not cleared for 
payment due to insufficient funds in the woman's account. The man explained that for the past month 
he had been pleading with the woman to have the matter settled, but to no avail. He therefore wanted 
the police to lay a charge against her in relation to the Dishonoured Cheque. 
3 
As the Sergeant at the station, you overheard the sentry telling the man that his report was not a 
criminal matter and he would need to seek civil redress. Do you agree with the advice of the sentry? 
Explain fully the reasons for your answer. (l Omarks) 



12. One day a pregnant woman visited a medical examiner's office for a check-up . She was ushered into 
the office of one of the interns who asked her to remove her clothing and put on a robe which he gave 
to her. She did as requeste d and lay on the examination table await ing attention . The intern spoke to 
her in a calm voice as he performed the examination . Whilst conduct ing the examination he told the 
atten din g nurse that he did not receiv e the patient's card from the receptionist and asked the nurse to 
get the card for him . As the nurse left the room the intern removed the surgical glove from the hand 
that he had been using to examine the woman's genital area, placed his hand upon her genital area and 
began to rub the area lightly in order to stimulate his own sexual desire. However, the nurse suddenly 
return ed to the room causing him to dec lare the exam ination concluded. The nurse later reported her 
observation to the sen ior med ical staff and the matte r was refened to the police for investiga tion . 
What offence, if any, has been committed by the intern? 
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer. (lOmark s) 
13. A man was a passenger in a maxi taxi when on reaching a bushy area he indicated to the driver that he 
had reached his stop. lie alighted fi·om the vehicle and walked to the driver's door as if to pay, when 
sudde nly he snatched a cell phone and $83 .00 cas h from the driver's hand and ran away. The driver 
came out of the vehic le to give chase but as the man hea rd the driver exit from of the vehicle he 
stopped running and turned to face the direction of the driver. He looked at the driver and remarked 
•ooh challenge meh', then turned and ran off. The driver stood where he was and started to tremble. 
However, due to the detection of the incident via smve illance camera system the man was captured by 
an alert police patrol a short distance away. 
What offence, if any, was committed by the man? 
Discuss fully the reasons for your answer. (10 marks ) 
14. After viewing a martial arts mov ie one evening, two young men both aged 19, began to discuss what 
they perceiv ed to be the virtues of the Japanese Warrior Discipline based on the content of the movie 
they had been viewing. The discussi on got to a point where one of them decided to prove that he had 
required discipline and capaci ty to make the necessary sacrifices to be a Samurai Warrior. To prove 
his point, he placed his hand on a table and told his friend that he had not always been truthful to his 
friends and relatives on many occasions, and that as a Samurai Warrior he had to perform an 
honomable act in order to make a clean start. lie then asked his friend to cut off his • little finger' . 
After som e hesitation, the o ther young man did as his friend had requested and severed the little 
finger off his f riend's left hand . Later that night the young man started to expe rience pain in his hand 
and when confronted by his mothe r he showed his mother the hand from which the finger had been 
severed and explained to her the circwnstances. I lis mother got angry and reported the matter to your 
station . When the police interviewed the young man who performed the cutting, he made it clear that 
his frie nd had consented to the act. 
Discuss fully whether the young man has a val id defence in relation to the repo1i that was made by 
the mother ofh is friend. (10ma rks) 
End 
4 