 
 
2017 POLICE PROMOTION (MAIN) EXAMINATION 
TO THE RANK OF SERGEANT 
 
SUBJECT   : LAW 
DATE   : 26th AUGUST, 2017 
TIME ALLOWED : 2 ½ HOURS 
 
 
INSTRUCTIONS: 
THIS PAPER CONTAINS TWELVE (12) QUESTIONS.  CANDIDATES ARE 
REQUIRED TO ANSWER ANY TEN (10) QUESTIONS EACH OF WHICH CARRY 
TEN (10) MARKS EACH. 
 
NB:- QUESTIONS ANSWERED IN EXCESS OF TEN WILL NOT BE 
CORRECTED. 
 
THE EXAMINATION IS WORTH 100 MARKS. 
 
THE PASS MARK IS 50% 
 
YOU ARE REMINDED OF THE NEED TO USE PROPER DICTION, CORRECT 
SPELLING, STANDARD GRAMMAR AND A N ORDERLY, LEGIBLE AND NEAT 
PRESENTATION OF YOUR WORK. 
 
WRITE YOUR EXAMINATION NUMBER ON THE COVER OF THE 
EXAMINATION ANSWER BOOKLET AND ON THE TOP OF EVERY PAGE 
THROUGHOUT THE BOOKLET. 
 
 
DO NOT WRITE YOUR NAME AND REGIMENTAL NUMBER IN 
RESPONSE TO ANY QUESTION 
 



 
Section A 
 
 
1. (a) Name seven (7)  circumstances under which a person may 
intentionally take the life of another human being, and would not 
be held liable for murder or manslaughter.    
                                                                                         
 
 
(7 marks) 
 (b) The definition of an offensive weapon at section 2 of the 
Prevention of Crime (Offensive Weapons) Act Chapter 11:09 
identifies three means by which an article may be deemed an 
offensive weapon.   
 
Name them.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(3 marks) 
2. (a) While on patrol duty one day a police constable who had recently 
graduated from the Police Academy had cause to respond to a 
domestic squabble between a man and his girlfriend. Based on 
accusations made by the young woman, the consta ble searched 
the pockets of the man's trousers and found a bag containing 
thirty grams of heroin. The constable arrested the man and took 
him to the station. The constable reported the occurrence to you, 
and asks for your assistance to draft the appropriat e charge in 
relation to the matter.  
 
Write out the particulars of the applicable copy of charge, in 
accordance with the provisions of the Dangerous Drugs Act, 
Chapter 11:25. (The statutory reference is not required).    
               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(7 marks)
      
 (b) State with reason whether  the particulars of the charge would be 
any different if the weight of the heroin in the bag was 22 grams.    
                          
         
 
(3 marks) 
3. (a) Section 50(1) of the Children’s Act No. 12 of 2012 ( “the Act” ) 
provides that where a person described at sub -section (2) of the 
Act, makes a complaint upon oath that a child has suffered, is 
suffering or is likely to suffer such harm as to cause concern for 
the welfare of the child, the court may require the person with 
responsibility to appear before it. Section 50(14) of the Act lists 
nine forms of conduct that satisfies the description of ‘ harm’ 
under section 50.     
   
State any four (4) of them. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(4 marks) 
 (b) Define any two (2) the following t erms under section 3(1) of the 
Children’s Act, 2012:       
                          
 Guardian 
 Legal Guardian 
 Visual representation 
                                         
                       
 
 
 
 
 
(6 marks) 
4. (a) As a general rule, the prosecution is required to call all the 
evidence, which it intends to rely on before the close of its case. 
  
State three (3) exceptions to this general rule.   
                                   
 
 
 
(6 marks) 



 (b) Explain the meaning of the following terms in relation t o the laws 
of evidence:   
 
(i) Hostile witness 
(ii)  Leading question                                                            
 
 
 
 
(4 marks) 
 
 
5. (a) Define fully the term ‘Restricted Person’ under the Firearms Act, 
Chapter 16:01.  
 
 
(6 marks) 
 (b) Generally, the police have no authority to enter private premises 
without a warrant. State four (4) exceptions to this general rule.     
                   
              
 
(4 marks) 
6. (a) Some indictable offences may be tried either at the Magistrate’s 
Court or at the High Court. There are three (3) instances when this 
may be done.  Name them. 
 
 
 
(6 marks) 
 (b) State the four (4) alternative actions a court may take where a 
defendant does not appear in court on the date of his case.    
                                                                    
 
(4 marks)                                                                                                 
 
 
Section B 
7. Jay always prided himself as a star footballer. In fact, he was not very 
good but somehow often got selected as a player on his team. One day 
during a football match the goalkeeper had been caught out of his goal 
and Jay failed to score despite being mere meters in front of the open 
goal. Later that evening while Jay was at a bar Vee, one of  Jay’s 
teammates, called out to Jay and said “ Aye Jay, you is the worst excuse 
for a football player boy. You go miss the Red House even if it in yuh face.” 
Jay became furious and told Vee that he would make him sorry he 
said that. He walked over to Vee holding a broken bottle which he 
used to stab Vee repeatedly in his chest.  At his trial for murder Jay 
raised the defence of provocation.   
 
Explain fully  the elements of the defence of provocation, and the 
likelihood of it being raised successfully.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(10 marks) 
8. Two women, a cashier and an accountant, worked closely together in 
the accounting department of a large retailer. Both were defrauding the 
company by separate schemes. The cashier was issuing checks to 
certain persons and then spl itting the proceeds with them. The 
accountant was making certain expense vouchers that she would issue 
to persons not entitled to reimbursement, and then she would share 
the proceeds with them. Both women assisted each other in the making 
and processing th eir respective checks and vouchers each month, but 
each believed that the other’s documents were legal. When things 
started to unwind, the police discovered both plots and arrested both 
women. Among the charges laid was one of conspiracy to defraud 
their company. They both defended against the conspiracy charge.  
  
What is the likely outcome of their defense to the conspiracy charge?   
In your answer, you are required to state the applicable law and 
produce the appropriate analysis based the given answer.                                                                                                                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(10 marks) 
 



9. Two years ago Lee, a young medical doctor, was beaten and savagely 
raped by Brutus at her home. Lee underwent therapy and counseling 
for several months in the aftermath of the event. However, she never 
forgot the grin on his face and the words ‘ easy baby, let nature take its 
course’, which he uttered to her during her attempts to push him off her 
body. Two days ago B rutus was caught raping a young woman. A 
group of angry villagers attempted to apprehend him, but managed to 
escape by fleeing the scene in his motorcar. Based on a report made to 
the police, a Rapid Response patrol sighted Brutus in his vehicle and a 
chase ensued. Brutus lost control of the vehicle and crashed. He 
received a severe wound and was losing blood. On arrival at the 
hospital, the medical staff was updated on the facts of the incident and 
the accident, and Brutus was diagnosed as needing immediat e stitches 
in order to save his life.  Lee, who was the doctor on call, was 
summoned to provide emergency treatment to the patient. Lee 
immediately began to attend to the patient who was grimacing in pain. 
She then overheard two of the nurses mentioning th at the patient had 
been caught committing rape. Lee then looked at her patient’s face and 
recognized that it was Brutus who had raped her two years ago. At 
that point, Lee stopped providing medical treatment on Brutus. 
Instead, she looked at him and said ‘ Hey, let nature take its course’ .  
Brutus cried out in pain and sorrow for his ill -deeds until he died later 
that night from severe blood loss.  
 
      Discuss fully  whether Lee committed any offence. In your answer, 
you are required to state  the applicabl e law and produce the 
appropriate analysis based the given facts.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(10 marks) 
10. Ranker, who died recently, was always known as a dapper dresser. 
When attending events he would often earn the admiration of others. 
His hallmark appearance was a well -cut tailor made suit, shoes with a 
glossy shine as if on parade and a diamond studded gold watch, 
among other items of jewelry that he wore. For his burial his widow 
decided to send him off in a manner that reflected his life. She  
provided the staff at the funeral home with one of his favorite suits 
and a pair of shiny shoes, for his final dressing. At his graveside, 
several of the mourners were heard remarking that Ranker will teach 
the angels how to dress. Before his casket was c losed his wife placed 
his diamond studded gold watch on his wrist as a gesture of letting 
him go with something that he truly cherished. Later that night, 
Gravedigger dug up the casket and roughly pulled the wristwatch off 
Rankers hand. The theft was later  discovered, and based on 
information received the police arrested Gravedigger and charged him 
with the offence of larceny from the person.    
 
Discuss fully whether Gravedigger can be convicted for this offence. 
In your answer, you are required to state t he applicable law and 
produce the appropriate analysis based the given facts. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(10 marks) 
11. Innocent went to visit his friend Coward one day. While they were 
socializing at Coward’s home, Coward received a telephone call from 
someone who informed him that the police was conducting a house to 
house search on his street apparently searching for an escaped convict. 
Coward knew that he and his wife had a stash of dried marijuana 
leaves in the house, which the police would find during thei r search. 
Coward then told Innocent about the call and asked him for his help to 
get some things out of the house. When Innocent enquired, Coward 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



                                                                 
END  
told him that he and his wife had some material in the house, that the 
police may mistake for Jihadist materia l and arrest them as terrorists. 
Confident that his friends were no terrorists, Innocent agreed to assist 
and ask questions later. Coward gave Innocent a knapsack and told 
him to take it to his home and they would arrange for its retrieval the 
next day. In  fact, unknown to Innocent, the knapsack contained the 
dried marijuana leaves weighing 450 grams, which Coward wished to 
avoid being detected by the police. While walking on the street 
Innocent was stopped by the police and searched, whereupon the 
content of the knapsack was discovered.  
 
Discuss fully whether Innocent can be prosecuted for any offence 
under the Dangerous Drugs legislation. In your answer, you are 
required to state the applicable law and produce the appropriate 
analysis based the given facts.   
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(10 marks) 
12. After consuming a large amount of alcohol during a get together with 
some of his friends, a young man boasted that he and his common law 
wife had created a way to keep the spice in their romance. He 
explained that they had an event called ‘Freaky Friday’ at least once a 
month. He went on to say, that on the selected Friday one of them 
would dress in a surprise costume and confront the other. They would 
engage in a role play before getting into their intimate a ctivity. The 
young man’s colleague Woodstalk, made the remark that some people 
know how to have fun. On the following Friday the young man was 
called upon to work late at his office to complete an urgent project. 
Upon learning of this, Woodstalk hatched a plan which he thought 
would be funny. He dressed in a costume with a hooded mask and 
hung a sign around his neck which read ‘ mute bandit’. He visited the 
young man’s home and knocked the door. When the young woman 
answered the door and saw the costumed cha racter, she immediately 
thought that it was her common law husband dressed as the mute 
bandit. She let him into the house and playfully begged the bandit not 
to hurt her. On his beckoning, she went to the bedroom and followed 
his hand gestures to remove he r clothes. They engaged in sexual 
intercourse during which Woodstalk maintained his character as a 
mute. When they were finished, he lay on the bed silently while 
thinking whether he had time to go for a repeat. Suddenly, the light 
came on and they both saw the young woman’s common-law husband 
standing at the doorway with a horrified look on his face. The young 
woman now cries that she was raped.       
  
Discuss fully whether Woodstalk can be convicted for this offence. In 
your answer, you are required to s tate the applicable law and produce 
the appropriate analysis based the given facts.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(10 marks) 
    