2022 POLICE PROMOTION (MAIN) EXAMINATION
TO THE RANK OF SERGEANT

SUBJECT : POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT
DATE : 12k NOVEMBER, 2022
TIME ALLOWED : 2 ¥2 HOURS
INSTRUCTIONS:
THIS PAPER HAS THREE (3) SECTIONS, CANDIDATES MUST ATTEMPT ALL
SECTIONS.
THE EXAMINATION IS WORTH 100 MARKS.
CANDIDATES ARE REQUIRED TO OBTAIN A MINIMUM OF 50% OF THE
POSSIBLE MARKS IN EACH SECTION.
IN A BLACK OR BLUE INK PEN, WRITE YOUR EXAMINATION NUMBER ON THE
COVER OF THE EXAMINATION ANSWER BOOKLET AND ON THE TOP OF
EVERY PAGE THROUGHOUT THE BOOKLET.
YOU ARE REMINDED OF THE NEED TO USE PROPER DICTION, CORRECT
SPELLING, STANDARD GRAMMAR AND AN ORDERLY, LEGIBLE AND NEAT
PRESENTATION OF YOUR WORK.
EACH SECTION MUST BEGIN ON A NEW PAGE.
DO NOT WRITE YOUR NAME, INITIALS OR REGIMENTAL NUMBER
ANYWHERE IN YOUR EXAMINATION ANSWER BOOKLET.
DO NOT IDENTIFY YOURSELF IN ANYWAY OTHER THAN YOUR
EXAMINATION CANDIDATE NUMBER.
NB:- QUESTIONS ANSWERED IN EXCESS WILL NOT BE CORRECTED.


--- page break ---

SECTION 1A - MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS (1 mark each) Total 20 marks
Instructions: This Section consists of twenty (20) multiple choice questions. Complete
this Section 1A by copying the question number into your answer booklet and write
the letter of your choice from the list of options.
1. | Which approach is NOT characteristic of the Contingency Leader style?
(A) Utilizes various styles of leadership.
(B) Applies whatever decisions comes to mind.
(C) Adopts the appropriate method.
(D) Adjusts their management style to the situation.
2. Which of the following are two (2) new pillars that were introduced in the TTPS
2022 to 2024 Strategic Plan?
(A) Public Safety and Information and Communication Technology.
(B) | Community Partnerships and Operational Excellence.
(C) Occupational Health and Wellness and Information and Communication
Technology.
(D) Operational Excellence and Occupational Health and Wellness.
3. | Which one (1) of the following are interpersonal skills demonstrated by
successful leaders?
(A) Instructing and collaborating.
(B) Using proactive approaches and issuing instructions.
(C) Public speaking and posting memoranda.
(D) Influencing and bargaining.
4, | Which of the following is NOT among the basic steps in decision making?
(A) Recognizing the characteristics of the problem.
(B) Identifying who caused the problem.
(C) Collecting data on the problem.
(D) Formulating alternative solutions to the problem.


--- page break ---

5. Which action is NOT characteristic of proactive leaders?
(A) They plan for events.
(B) They do not wait for events to happen.
(C) They only make decisions during the event or crisis.
(D) They form teams that seek a wide variety of solutions.
6. | Which one (1) of the following may prevent managers from supporting individuals
in achieving success in daily operations?
(A)  Authoritativeness.
(B) Empathy.
(C) Knowledge.
(D) Patience.
7. Hierarchical communication occurs between:
(A) Corporal to Corporal in different Divisions.
(B) _—_ Inspector to Inspector within the same Division.
(C) Sergeant to Inspector in different Divisions.
(D) Superintendent to Senior Superintendent in the same Division.
8. As a police manager which one of these elements can be an obstacle to good
communication?
(A) Feedback.
(B) Encoding.
(C) Assumptions.
(D) Decoding.
9. | Which one (1) of the following is NOT among MASLOW’s hierarchy of needs?
(A) — Self-actualization.
(B) Autonomy.
(C) Recognition.
(D) Security.


--- page break ---

10. Which pillar in the TTPS 2022-2024 Strategic Plan is expected to increase efficiency

and effectiveness?

(A) Occupational Health and Wellness.

(B) Public Safety.

(C) Operational excellence.

(D) Information and Communication Technology.

11. The TTPS 2022-2024 Strategic Plan indicates a focus on “the best police practices
should be based on the scientific evidence about what works best and is the best use of
available research on outcomes of police work”. Which one of the following is defined
by the above statement?

(A) — Problem-Oriented Policing.
(B) Evidence - Based Policing.
(C) Community Policing.

(D) | CompStat Policing.

12. Which one (1) of the following does not constitute a legitimate base for authority

according to Weber?

(A) Rational grounds, that is resting on a belief in the legal rules.

(B) Traditions and the legitimacy of the status of those traditions.

(C) Specific and exceptional sanctity, exemplary character of an individual.
(D) The characteristics of the leader.

13. Complete the following sentence by choosing one of the undermentioned words.
“Planning should occur both formally and informally at____ levels of
every police department”

(A) _ strategic
(B) managerial
(C) supervisory
(D) all
14. The core principle of time management is: -
(A) distinguishing what is important from what is urgent.
(B) establishing all goals and achieving all of them.
(C) creating a list of goals to determine which ones to achieve.
(D) identifying which goals are more important for achievement.


--- page break ---

15. In accordance with Departmental Order 64/2001 which function is NOT within
the scope of a Sergeant of Police?

(A) Supervises the activities of a squad of police officers in a police station
or shift.

(B) Conducts certain police operations such as road blocks and searches.

(C) Conducts identification parades of suspects in serious crimes.

(D) Performs the duties of a ‘Property Keeper’ in a small Police Station.

16. Which one (1) of the following is NOT included in an effective organizational
communication model?

(A) Planning.

(B) Generalizing.

(C) Organizing.

(D)  Operationalizing.

17. Which five (5) competencies are prerequisites for police leadership?

(A) Dedication, commitment, trustworthy, hardworking, friendly.

(B) Taskmaster, knowledgeable, professional, authoritative, morality.

(C) Authority, Talent, Experience, Ethics, Training and Education.

(D) Amiability, computer literacy, professional knowledge, interagency
collaboration.

18. Which one (1) of the following is an effective management principle?

(A) Set “to do list”.

(B) Set realistic deadlines.

(C) Pick and choose tasks.

(D)  Discourage routine practices.

19. Complete the following statement, by choosing one of the undermentioned -
“Problem analysis is a careful examination of the _ facts to
determine ”

(A) _ the cause of the problem, so that positive action can be taken.

(B) | who should be assigned responsibility for the problem.

(C) _ if there isa problem and the magnitude of the problem.

(D) | whocaused the problem and what portion of blame should be attributed.


--- page break ---

20. What are the three (3) major areas of work in every police organization?
(A) Crime prevention, Prosecution and Convictions.
(B) Recruitment, Training and Restoring Public Confidence.
(C) Administration, Supervision and Operations.
(D) Performance Appraisals, Training and Discipline.
SECTION 1B - TRUE/FALSE QUESTIONS (1 mark each) Total 10 marks
Instructions: This Section consists of ten (10) questions for you to label TRUE or
FALSE. Complete this Section 1B by copying the question number into your answer
booklet and write True/T or False/F next to the number.
1. Managers must be calm and steadfast, despite opposition to their beliefs and
opinions.
(A) True
(B) False
2. Legal standards are defined by the law and ethical standards are defined by
Standing Orders.
(A) True
(B) False
3. Once a problem has been selected for analysis the next step is to describe it
accurately.
(A) True
(B) False
4. A Corporal-led patrol which seized $21,500.00 in cash from a suspect which the
officers believed to be the proceeds of crime, has underscored the need for a
management training program.
(A) True
(B) False
5. |Community relations is the responsibility of the Inspectors and First Division
Officers in each Police Division.
(A) True
(B) False
6. Police Sergeants must make decisions about which part of the organization’s
culture, if any, should be changed.
(A) True
(B) False


--- page break ---

7. Inter-agency collaboration is most effective when each agency’s commander work
towards their own individual goals.
(A) True
(B) False
8. Before implementing any decision, the personnel and other resources of the Police
Station, unit or department should be taken into consideration.
(A) True
(B) False
9. InMc Gregor’s Theory of management, Theory ‘X’ is management by objective and
Theory ‘Y’ is management by control.
(A) True
(B) False
10. Leaders must not look for ways to alter the status quo to change the operating
system within a police agency.
(A) True
(B) False
SECTION 2 - MINI CASE STUDY Total (30 marks)
Instructions: This Section comprises two (2) mini cases followed by four (4) questions
each. The total marks per case is 15 marks. Complete this Section by copying the Case
number and Question number into your answer booklet and write appropriate
response to each question.
MINI CASE No. 1
The Sergeant in charge of Cumac Police Station has received instructions from his Inspector
that the Senior Superintendent has instructed that the officers assigned to Cumac Station
should cease working 48 hours on to 48 hours off and begin working 8 am to 6 pm and 6
pm to 8 am the next day followed by 2 days off. Many officers at Cumac Station expressed
great disgruntlement at the new policy and threatened to report in sick. However, while
some officers at other stations in the Division expressed fears that this policy would be
extended to all Stations, other officers indicated that they want to make the change to other
shifts similar to Cumac Station.
On Tuesday 4% October, 2022 the Sergeant sends a telephone message to all the Second
Division Officers attached to Cumac Station requesting that they meet in the conference
room of the Station at 10:00 am, on Tuesday 18 October, 2022. He also requested that
officers clearly state their reasons for their objections to the change in hours as well as make
recommendations in writing and submit to him before the meeting.
At the meeting, the Sergeant indicated to the officers that he understands their pleas and
while he empathized with them, the Division’s Executive has considered the interests of the
various stakeholders, and the current decision is the best one. He then shared a number of
the potential benefits of the reduced working hours with the officers. Subsequently, after
listening to the comments and recommendations by officers the Sergeant indicated to the
officers that he will:


--- page break ---

a) Take their concerns and recommendations back to the members of the Division’s
Executive for consideration; and
b) Meet with them in two weeks to provide them with an update on the decision of the
Division’s Executive regarding the new working hours.

1. _ Using either the theory of Maslow or Herzberg, describe why there

would be dissatisfaction at this change in policy. (2 marks)
2. List two (2) management benefits of requesting a face-to-face meeting

and written information from officers. (4 marks)
3. Using the concept of work-life balance, describe two (2) possible benefits

to officers of the change in policy. (5 marks)
4. Outline two (2) other bits of information that the Sergeant might gather

to support his recommendation to the Division’s Executive. (4 marks)

MINI CASE No. 2

A new Sergeant has been put in charge of the Orinco Police Station. In his handing-over
oral report the departing SDO has informed that the District has a growing praedial larceny
problem but the station is short-staffed. In addition, the terrain where the police resources,
including the lone police vehicle, have to be deployed, is very difficult. Furthermore, the
majority of this type of crime appears to occur at night on weekends. The departing SDO
also provides his personal observations about the Corporals and officers of the two shifts X
and Y occupying the Orinco Station; indicating the need for, in his words “careful
management” especially of shift X.
At his first meeting with the Corporal and the two officers of shift ‘X’, the Sergeant instructs
the Corporal to perform anti-praedial larceny operations on the upcoming weekend with a
view to arresting any suspected persons. The Corporal advises the Sergeant that while he
is desirous of detailing the officers on shift ‘X’ to perform the duties on the weekend, he
recommends that the police officers on “Y’ shift perform the initial anti-praedial larceny
duty next Wednesday instead of the weekend. The Corporal states that he and his officers
have carefully reviewed all the reports of praedial larceny in the Orinco Station District and
90% of the offences occur on Wednesday nights between 7.00 pm and 5:00 am next morning.
He also advises the Sergeant that shift ‘Y’ will be on duty from 8.00 am on Wednesday until
8.00 am on Friday. The Corporal also suggests that he, the Sergeant, enlist the assistance of
the Forestry Officers who are assigned to the Ministry of Agriculture office in the district,
as they have a 4x4 vehicle that is suited for the terrain where the duties are to be performed.
Mindful of the suggestion for “careful management”, the Sergeant informed the Corporal
and the two Constables, that while the Corporal’s observations are duly noted, he is in
charge of the station and the officers who he has rostered for duty on shift “X’ will perform
the duty as he has instructed. Furthermore, he does not want the staff or any other of the
resources from the Ministry of Agriculture involved in police work.
1. In what ways does this case present (i) the societal and (ii) organizational

contexts of policing? (4 marks)
2. Which management theory best describes the call for “careful

management” implied and accepted by the Sergeant. (2 marks)
3. Name two (2) leadership knowledge/ skills the Sergeant failed to display

in either or both approaches to instructing shift X for the duty, giving

reasons for your answer/ (4 marks)


--- page break ---

4. Compare the leadership styles of the Sergeant and the Corporal
suggesting which might be more effective in the above scenario. (5 marks)
SECTION 3 - ESSAY-TYPE QUESTIONS Total (20 marks each)
Instructions: This Section comprises essay-type questions. You are required to choose
TWO (2) topics. Copy your choice of questions into your answer booklet and respond
in the format of an essay of no more than 250 words. Marks will be awarded as follows:
~ Content (18 marks), Use of English (2 marks).
1. Using examples, describe three (3) habits of an effective leader.
2. Discuss two (2) benefits and one (1) limitation of inter-agency collaboration and
provide details of one (1) example of either situation.
3. Describe two (2) strategies for managing conflict and give one example of each in
a policing environment.
4. _ Explain the term “ethical standards”. Provide one (1) example of how this might
be employed in a policing context.
