2024 POLICE PROMOTION (MAIN) EXAMINATION |
TO THE RANK OF SERGEANT

SUBJECT : POLICE SUPERVISION/MANAGEMENT |
DATE : 30TH NOVEMBER, 2024

TIME ALLOWED : 3HOURS

INSTRUCTIONS:

THIS PAPER HAS THREE (3) SECTIONS, CANDIDATES MUST ATTEMPT ALL
SECTIONS. .
THE EXAMINATION IS WORTH 100 MARKS. :
CANDIDATES ARE REQUIRED TO OBTAIN A MINIMUM OF 50% OF THE
POSSIBLE MARKS IN EACH SECTION.

IN A BLACK OR BLUE INK PEN, WRITE YOUR EXAMINATION NUMBER ON THE

COVER OF THE EXAMINATION ANSWER BOOKLET AND ON THE TOP OF

EVERY PAGE THROUGHOUT THE BOOKLET.

YOU ARE REMINDED OF THE NEED TO USE PROPER DICTION, CORRECT :
SPELLING, STANDARD GRAMMAR AND AN ORDERLY, LEGIBLE AND NEAT
PRESENTATION OF YOUR WORK.

EACH SECTION MUST BEGIN ON A NEW PAGE.

DO NOT WRITE YOUR NAME, INITIALS OR REGIMENTAL NUMBER :
ANYWHERE IN YOUR EXAMINATION ANSWER BOOKLET.

DO NOT IDENTIFY YOURSELF IN ANYWAY OTHER THAN YOUR
EXAMINATION CANDIDATE NUMBER. :
NB:- QUESTIONS ANSWERED IN EXCESS WILL NOT BE CORRECTED.


--- page break ---

SECTION 1A ~ MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS/STATEMENTS (1 mark each)
| Total 20 marks |
Instructions: This Section consists of twenty (20) multiple choice
questions/statements. Complete this Section 1A by copying the question number into
your answer booklet and write the letter of your choice from the list of options.
1. | Asystem through which individuals work as a team is called: - |
(A) an integrated society
(B) an organization :
(C) an investigation
(D) a process direction and control
: 2. The three main functions of a supervisor's job are leading, directing and
f (A) Training :
| (B) Administration
(C) Controlling :
(D) Coordinating
3. Which of the following best describes a concept of strategic management, “where
people continually expand their capacity to create the result they truly desire and where
people are continually learning to learn together”?
(A) Total Quality Approach
(B) Command Accountability Framework
(C) The Learning Organization Approach
(D) Strategic Organizational Learning Framework
4. Tactical plans and procedures should be developed |
(A) after the incident has taken place
(B) while the incident is taking place
(C) long in advance of the expected incident H
: (D) just prior to the anticipated incident
5. In what section of the organization would the officer with responsibility to
integrate different parts of the work process be found?
(A) Staffing
| (B) Planning
(C) Directing


--- page break ---

, (D) Coordinating

6. A person’s values, sentiments and beliefs are reflected in which of the following?
(A) Perceptions
(B) Paradigms 7
(C) Morals
(D) Behavior

7. Effective communication is facilitated through which of the following? |
(A) Deeds
(B) Words
(C) Intonation
(D) All of the above

8. | Which outcome is not included in Strategic Area 3 (Operational Excellence) in the
TTPS Strategic Plan? |
(A) Improve Case Management
(B) Enhance self-image of officers
(C) Improve Staff Training
(D) None of the above

9, The type of analysis that examines internal procedures and practices is called;
(A) Administrative Analysis
(B) Operational Analysis
(C) Crime and Problem Analysis
(D) None of the above

10. Which type of analysis is particularly useful to Tactical and Investigative Units
addressing Organized Crime, Drug Trafficking and Terrorism?
(A) Operational Analysis
(B) Budget Analysis
(C) Intelligence Analysis


--- page break ---

| (D) Crime Analysis |
11. Which type of analysis best informs patrol allocation and deployment?
: (A) Operational Analysis |
| (B) Budget Analysis

(C) Intelligence Analysis 7
(D) Crime Analysis ;
: 12. What is the principle that advocates for decision-making at the lowest level in

: which the authority exists?

(A) Decision Principle

(B) Authoritarian Principle

(C) Organizational Principle

, (D) Authority-level Principle

| 13. Which of the following combinations of strategies correctly represent Strategic

Area 1 in the TTPS Strategic Plan?

(A) Restore public trust and confidence, reduce violent crimes, improve case
management :
: (B) Build effective community partnerships, increase safety in public places,

i increase focus on crime prevention

(C) Restore public trust and confidence, strengthen community engagement,

build effective community partnership

(D) None of the above

14. Skillful police officers avoid the use of force primary through; |
: (A) Effectively threatening force
: (B) Good communication

(C) Collaboration with other officers
(D) Focusing on the problem, not the person |
| 15. What is the name of the mechanism for monitoring activity and performance of all

officers who have been delegated authority?


--- page break ---

) (A) Professional Compliance
(B) Principle of command and control
(C) Policies and procedures
(D) Principles of accountability
16. The model which states that social and psychological factors in the work setting
have considerable effect on the performance is called:
(A) Growth-open System Model
(B) Force and Coercion Model ;
(C) Affective/ Affiliation Model
(D) Economic/ Machine Model
17. Which category of power is used most often when officers or managers in staff
positions want to exert influence on line operation?
(A) Charisma power
(B) Expert power
(C) Reward power
(D) Position power
18. Which of the following is an example of the 999 System of Communication?
(A) Command and Control
(B) Management information
(C) Line Operation
(D) None of the above
19. The “crime triangle” refers to the;
(A) Combinations of hotspots, police presence and defense force activity
(B) Combinations of drugs, weapons and cash
(C) Combinations of offenders, victims and criminal opportunity
(D) Combinations of offenders, victims and location
20. Interms of motivators, which of the following approaches to Human Development
| refers to the restructuring of work itself?


--- page break ---

(A) Organization Development
| (B) Participative Management ;
. (C) Job Enrichment ‘
(D) Theory X and Theory Y |
SECTION 1B - TRUE/FALSE QUESTIONS/STATEMENTS (1 mark each) Total 10 marks
Instructions: This Section has ten (10) questions for you to label TRUE or FALSE.
Complete Section 1B by copying the question number into your answer booklet and write
\ True/T OR False/F next to the number:
: 1. Communication is the primary vehicle for the dissemination of directive. |
2. Rewards and recognition are most important in modifying behavior.
3. Engaging the subordinates in the process of analyzing performance encourages
acceptance of the performance management system.
| 4. Crime Analysis is not the process of identifying, describing and disseminating
information concerning crime patterns and trends.
‘ 5. Patrol allocation and deployment are the most common type of police
| department operations analysis.
6. The principle of Unity of Command insists that the reporting relationship between
subordinate and superior be on a one-to-one basis.
7. The Scaler Principle in Police Management is another name for manpower
planning.
8. The single most important determinant of whether or not a case will be solved is
the information the victim supplies to the immediately responding patrol officer.
| 9. The Span of Control may be thought of as broadening progressively towards the :
top of the organization.
10. Strategic plans are the narrowest of the four (4) types of police plans and usually |
of the shortest duration.
} SECTION 2 - MINI CASE STUDY Total (30 marks)
Instructions: This Section comprises two (2) mini case study questions for 15 marks each.
| Copy the Section and question number into your answer booklet and respond as required.
: 1. Asa Sergeant of Police, you are given the responsibility to manage a Gang Unit within
4 the division by the Senior Superintendent in charge. You are given the opportunity to
select twenty-four officers comprising Constables and Corporals from the division to
start its operations. You are also required to consider the management principles of chain
; of command, unity of command and span of control when organizing the unit.


--- page break ---

(A) Explain how the principle of unity of command will assist with the
reporting process within the unit. (5 marks)
(B) Howcan proficient supervision be promoted by utilizing the concept
of span of control. (5 marks)
(C) Discuss how the chain of command can assist in the communication
process within the unit. (5marks) |
2. Asa Sergeant assigned to a patrol unit, you are confronted with the challenge whereby
fourteen constables attached to the unit participated in the recent promotion
interviewing process, however, only two (2) of the officers were successful. The
performance of the unsuccessful officers deteriorated significantly and they appeared to
be highly demotivated. This was demonstrated by an increase in sick leave and
absenteeism. As an astute supervisor, you decided to explore your knowledge of
motivation to increase the officer’s productivity.
(A) Explain to the Inspector in charge of your unit, how Abraham
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs affects behavior, and show how the
application of this theory will increase motivation and impact
ductivi (8 marks)
productivity.
(B) Discuss how Frederick Herzberg Theory of Motivation can also be
applied to motivate the officers to increase productivity. (7 marks)
SECTION 3 - ESSAY QUESTIONS Total (40 marks)
Instructions: This Section comprises four (4) essay questions for 20 marks each. You are
required to answer ANY TWO (2) of your choosing. Copy the question number into your
answer booklet and respond in the format of an essay of no more than 250 words. (Note

that marks will be awarded as follows: - Content 36 marks, Use of English Language 4

marks).

1. The terms formal leader and manager are not synonymous. However, leadership and
management overlap to some degree and both are important for organizational
success.

Do you agree or disagree with this statement? Provide justification for your answer.

2. The Police Operations Centre and Divisional Command Centre are the focal points for
command, control and coordination of all law enforcement activities. They can assist |
in the supervision, monitoring and evaluation of performance targets. As a recently
promoted Sergeant, discuss how you can use these entities to manage your patrol
activities and achieve your objectives.

3. The Theory advanced by Hersey and Blanchard is the most useful and practical
situational Theory of Leadership. Do you agree or disagree with this statement?
Provide justification for your position.

4. Change will not occur if not managed effectively, critically discuss the six (6) main steps
that will facilitate effective change management.


--- page break ---

