2021 POLICE PROMOTION (MAIN) EXAMINATION
TO THE RANK OF SERGEANT

SUBJECT : LAW
DATE : 14TH AUGUST, 2021
TIME ALLOWED : 21%2 HOURS
INSTRUCTIONS:
THIS PAPER CONTAINS TWELVE (12) QUESTIONS. CANDIDATES ARE
REQUIRED TO ANSWER ANY TEN (10) QUESTIONS EACH OF WHICH WILL
CARRY TEN (10) MARKS.
THE PASS MARK IS 50%
IN A BLACK OR BLUE INK PEN, WRITE YOUR EXAMINATION NUMBER ON THE
COVER OF THE EXAMINATION ANSWER BOOKLET AND ON THE TOP OF
EVERY PAGE THROUGHOUT THE BOOKLET.
YOU ARE REMINDED OF THE NEED TO USE PROPER DICTION, CORRECT
SPELLING, STANDARD GRAMMAR AND AN ORDERLY, LEGIBLE AND NEAT
PRESENTATION OF YOUR WORK.
EACH QUESTION MUST BEGIN ON A NEW PAGE.
DO NOT WRITE YOUR NAME, INITIALS OR REGIMENTAL NUMBER
ANYWHERE IN YOUR EXAMINATION ANSWER BOOKLET.
DO NOT IDENTIFY YOURSELF IN ANYWAY OTHER THAN YOUR
EXAMINATION CANDIDATE NUMBER.
NB:- QUESTIONS ANSWERED IN EXCESS OF TEN WILL NOT BE
CORRECTED.


--- page break ---

SECTION A
1. (a) An indictable offence is one for which the accused / defendant is
tried beforea Judge and Jury. However, there are four (4)
instances in which indictable offences may be tried summarily
before a Magistrate’s Court.
List them. (8 marks)
(b) Indictable offences are sub-divided into:
(i) arrestable offences, and
(it) non-arrestable offences.
Explain what is meant by the term arrestable offence. (2 marks)
2. By virtue of Section 4 (1) of the Summary Courts Act Chapter 4:20 the
President may, by warrant under her hand, appoint a person to be a
Justice of the Peace for the whole of Trinidad and Tobago or for such
district as shall be expedient.
(a) State six (6) functions that may be performed by a Justice of the
Peace as it relates to the criminal law. (6 marks)
(b) State the four (4) alternative actions a court may take where a
defendant does not appear in court on the date of his case. (4 marks)
3. The case of R v Turnbull sets out a number of rules or guidelines in
relation to the admissibility of identification evidence.
State in full any five (5) of these rules/ guidelines. (10 marks)
4. (a) Section 31 (1) of the Sexual Offences Act, Chapter 11:28 as
amended (the “Act”), provides for the mandatory reporting of
suspected abuse on a child by eight (8) categories of persons,
recited at sub-sections (a) to (h). The first four of these include
the following:
(a) The parent or guardian.
(b) A person who has actual custody of the child.
(c) A person who has temporary custody for a special purpose e.g., a
teacher.
(d) A registered medical practitioner, nurse or midwife who has
performed a medical examination on the child.
State the other four (4) categories included under Section 31 (1)
of the Act. (8 marks)
(b) Define the term ‘child’ under Section 2 of the Act. (2 marks)
5. (i) Section 8 of the Firearms Act, Chapter 16:01 (the “Act”) prohibits
the carrying of firearms or ammunition in three (3) public places
as prescribed by the President.
State the three (3) public places. (3 marks)


--- page break ---

(ii) Section 2 of the Act defines the term ‘Restricted Person’. You are
required to examine the partial definition of restricted person
below. Reproduce and complete it by correctly filling in the
blank spaces.

Restricted Person means:
Any person who at any time within years next
before the event for which the term issued:
(a) Has been declared by pursuant to Section 3 to
be a restricted person;
(b) Has been of an offence involving
and sentenced to a term of imprisonment exceeding
$< (7 marks)
6. (a) The actus reus or prohibited conduct of a crime may consist of
either an act or an omission. State five (5) circumstances under
which a person may be found liable by omission. (5 marks)

(b) Name five (5) circumstances under which a person may
intentionally take the life of another human being, and would
not be held liable for murder or manslaughter. (5 marks)

SECTION B

7. Four male friends, Axel, Bluboy, Cosmo and Darkie were on holiday,

and having drinks at a bar in celebration of Darkie’s birthday. Whilst
there they met a young woman named Rhea who they lured back to
their hotel room. The guys made repeated sexual advances to Rhea,
but she rejected the advances from all except for Darkie. Rhea said
she would have sex with Darkie but not with the others. Axel then
said, "If she isn't willing to have sex with all of us, then we'll have to force
her," Bluboy agreed, but Cosmo said that he did not want any part of
it if she was not willing, and he left the room. Darkie remained silent.
Rhea told them to forget the whole thing and that she wanted to
leave, but Axel locked the door so she couldn't get out. Axel then
forcibly held Rhea down and proceeded to have intercourse with her.
Bluboy, who was drunk, then said he will take his turn. He stripped
off his clothes and climbed upon Rhea on the bed. However, before
he actually had intercourse with her, he passed out from the alcohol.
Relieved that she wouldn't be forced to have sex again, Rhea also
passed out. Darkie decided that since she had said she was willing to
have sex with him in the first place, it was OK and he proceeded to
have sexual intercourse with the unconscious Rhea. When he was
finished Rhea woke up and started screaming when she felt a man on
top of her. Darkie managed to calm her down, after which they
opened the door and allowed her to leave. The police have now
arrested Axel, Bluboy and Darkie and have charged each of them
with an offence of rape.


--- page break ---

Discuss fully, the chances that Bluboy and Darkie can be convicted
of the offence of rape. In your answer, you are required to refer to the
given facts, and provide an appropriate analysis with the elements of
the applicable offence, in support of your conclusion. (10 marks)
8. While Saint was going through the possessions of his deceased
cousin in his capacity as the executor of the estate of the deceased, he
discovered a pistol along with the relevant authorizing permit
secured in a chest. Saint took possession of the pistol and the permit
and secured them at his home. Whilst in conversation with a friend
who works in the security industry, Saint’s friend advised him that
the pistol should not be left at his home unattended, since it was
issued for the purpose of personal protection and being a licenced
firearm holder himself, he should be carrying it on his person at all
times. Having received that advice, Saint started to keep the pistol
on his person at all times. About ten days after coming into possession
of the pistol, Saint was standing at the roadside awaiting a taxi when
a passer-by noticed a bulge at his waistline. The passer-by formed the
opinion that it was a firearm, and alerted nearby constables on patrol.
The officers challenged Saint and found the pistol secured on his
person. Although Saint did not have his deceased cousin’s permit
with him, he told the constables that everything was ok, since he is
also a licenced firearm holder. He then produced that permit for their
inspection and informed them that he was carrying his deceased
cousin's weapon in his capacity as the executor of his will.
State whether Saint can be prosecuted for any offence under the
firearms legislation. Discuss fully, and in your answer, you are
required to refer to the given facts, and provide an appropriate
analysis of the applicable law, in support of your conclusion. (10 marks)
9, Dyno, who has two previous convictions for sexual assaults and is
currently on bail stemming from a charge related to gender-based
violence, visited his dentist one day. There were three patients ahead
of him seated in the waiting area, one of whom was a young mother
with a child. Shortly afterwards, the young mother began breast-
feeding her child. Dyno looked in the direction of the mother and
smiled while he sang the words “Oh how I wish I were a child again.”
_ The young mother quickly ceased breast-feeding the child, covered
her breast, and sat in a state of apprehension while keeping Dyno
within her focus. When she noticed that Dyno shifted the position of
his feet as if to stand, she wasted no time in getting up with her child,
and dashing into one of the clinical rooms to get away from him.
When she explained to the dental assistant what took place, the dental
assistant, who knew of his criminal record, called the police. Dyno
was subsequently arrested for the offence of indecent assault.
Discuss fully, whether Dyno can be successfully prosecuted for the
offence of indecent assault. In your answer, you are required to refer
to the given facts and provide an appropriate analysis of the
applicable law, in support of your conclusion. (10 marks)
10. Brothers Harvey and Steve were born three years apart to ambitious
parents, who were also successful with their financial endeavours.
The family was generally considered to be wealthy. Five years ago,


--- page break ---

after the death of their mother Harvey relocated to another home, due
to the emotional impact of remaining at the family home. Steve
continued to live at the house and over the years he had renovations
done to the house and bought new furnishings to keep his father
comfortable. Harvey, who is now aged 48, recently moved back into
the house and brought with him his 20-year-old fiancé Kashley. Steve
became furious, as he believed that Kashley was only after the family
wealth and she saw his brother as her proverbial ‘meal ticket’. The
ensuing disagreement between the brothers caused their once
harmonious relationship to deteriorate into one of mutual bitterness.
Kashley wanted to confront Steve about his attitude towards Harvey,
but her mother cautioned her not to get involved in the family feud.
Knowing that Kashley was very uncomfortable and fearful for her
safety due to the high rate of crime in the area, Steve hatched a plan
to make her uncomfortable so she will leave. One evening, he
triggered an argument with his brother then left in a rage stating that
he will spend the night at a friend’s house. Instead, Steve returned to
the house at five minutes to ten that said night when everyone had
retired to bed. He forced open a side door to get inside, where he
removed some of the portable furnishings from the house, and fled
the scene via his point of entry. Kashley became frantic when she
discovered the intrusion around 7:30am the next morning. Harvey
made a report to the police and kept trying to reassure her of her
safety. Later that evening, Steve visited the police station where he
owned up to the activity. You are the supervising corporal on duty at
the station, and you heard two young detectives in a discussion, as to
whether Steve should be charged with the offence of burglary or
house breaking and larceny.
Did Steve commit an offence? Explain fully the reasoning you will
provide to the officers to resolve their discussion. In your answer,
you are required to refer to the given facts, and provide an
appropriate analysis with applicable law in support of your
conclusion. (10 marks)
11. Lilith, Jester and Smiley have developed a good friendship with each
other over the past three years. They fully support each other with
their individual pursuits, including personal relationships. Lilith is
currently in an intimate relationship with Adam who is a fitness
instructor. While the trio were going for a drive one day, Lilith
confided in the others that she was getting suspicious about Adam,
because of the extra attention he has been giving to one of his clients
named Eve. She told her friends that she suspects that Eve fakes
clumsiness with stretching exercises, just to get Adam to focus upon
her constantly, and assist her physically into the required positions.
She admitted that Eve is quite attractive, and she had a dream that
Adam abandoned her for Eve. Jester and Smiley reassured Lilith that
it was just a dream, and that Adam was devoted to her. About twenty
minutes later, Lilith saw Eve walking along the roadway and
encouraged her friends to scare Eve as a prank. They drove alongside
the walking Eve and Smiley remarked “ Nice girl, come leh we carry you
for a drive nuh.” Eve frowned at Smiley and increased her walking
pace. Jester then drove the vehicle up to Eve’s position, and Smiley
and Lilith got out and bundled Eve into the back seat of the vehicle.
Eve started to cry as the vehicle sped off. The trio initially laughed
and mocked her, but when they realized that she was crying


--- page break ---

breathlessly, Smiley started to tell her that it was just a joke and that
she should stop crying. They eventually dropped her out of the
vehicle a few blocks away hoping that she will be alright. However, a
pedestrian who had seen what took place alerted the police who
intercepted the trio, and arrested them for kidnapping. When
interviewed, all three told the police that it was just a prank, and at
no time did they make or even consider making any demand for
ransom or any reward for her release.
Discuss fully whether Lilith and her friends Jester and Smiley can
be successfully prosecuted for kidnapping. In your answer, you are
required to refer to the given facts and provide an appropriate
analysis with the applicable law, in support of your conclusion. (10 marks)
12. Four female friends April, Bee, Chrissy, and Dairy decided that since
the borders were closed due to the pandemic, they would spend their
vacation at a local hotel. While at the hotel bar one evening they met
Fannie Le Flurte who seemed to have a bubbly personality. After
consuming a few alcoholic beverages, Fannie started giggling and
revealing intimate details about her sexual escapades with men.
Unknown to Fannie, one of the men she had recently been with was
Dairy’s boyfriend. Realizing Dairy’s discomfort, April suggested
that they go to their rooms and call it a night. While travelling in the
elevator, Fannie said they should all go to her room and watcha scary
movie. Upon reaching their floor, all except Dairy went to Fannie’s
room. Upon entry Fannie hastened to the bathroom. While she was
absent April said “she needs to be taught a lesson. Let’s rough her up a
bit.” Bee nodded in agreement while Chrissy just stood there without
responding. When Fannie returned to the television room an
argument started with April and Bee hurling insults at Fannie about
her character. April then told Fannie that it’s time she learns what
happens to home-wreckers. Bee suddenly had a change of heart and
said, "I'm not going to go through with it, and I think you all should
stop as well." At that point, Bee left Fannie’s room and went to her
own room. Chrissy also left saying that she was going to check on
Dairy and will be right back. When Chrissy returned to the room a
few minutes later she saw April choking Fannie while telling her to
stop screaming. Fannie was choked to death as Chrissy just watched
the whole time, and said and did nothing. April then went to Bee's
room and Chrissy went back to her room and did nothing. April told
Bee everything that had happened. Bee said that she could spend the
night in her room so that she wouldn't be found with the dead body.
The next morning, the police found Fannie and arrested April, Bee
and Chrissy.
Discuss fully, whether Bee and Chrissy can be held liable and be
prosecuted as parties to a crime in relation to the death of Fannie La
Flurte. In your answer, you are required to refer to the given facts,
and provide an appropriate analysis of the applicable law, in support
of your conclusion. (10 marks)
END
