(2) Police Orders by
PAN 4 Commissioner of Police
ey Police Administration Building
=e Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
a | Port of Spain
WITH PRIDE Thursday 7" January, 2021.
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian employees of
the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
ee Pk ee ee ee
No. 03 Departmental Order PART I-NIL
PART II
Firearm Exhibits Examination by the Trinidad and Tobago Police Armoury
Standard Operating Procedures

Purpose
To outline and standardize the procedures for the examination of firearm evidence at the Trinidad and
Tobago Police Service Firearm Management Unit herein-after referred to as Armoury.
Scope
These procedures shall be applied to all firearm exhibits submitted to the Police Armoury only. It is not
intended to alter, change or modify any existing Standing Order (S.O.) or Departmental Order (D.O.) in
relation to submission of exhibits to any other scientific agency for examination by that agency. The nature
of the investigation will determine when an exhibit is to be brought to this Unit for the requisite testing.
Armourer’s opinion is limited to whether the item is capable of falling within the definition of a firearm as
defined by the Firearms Act Chapter 16:01, as amended. For further scientific analysis, as may be required
by an investigation, the exhibit will have to be forwarded to the Forensic Sciences Centre.
Definitions

e Action - The working mechanism of a firearm. Examples include semi-automatic, lever action, Bolt
action, etc.

e Ammunition - as defined by the Firearms Act Chapter 16:01 as amended.

e Armourer’s Report/Certificate of Examination - Report of the type specified given under the
hand of an appointed Police Armourer detailing the findings of the examination of a firearm exhibit
for production in a Court of Law.

e Calibre - A measurement of the approximate diameter of the barrel of a firearm at its muzzle from
land to land.

e Cartridge - A complete round of ammunition consisting of case, primer, propellant and one or more
projectiles. Also to be applied to shot-shells.

e Cartridge Designation - with reference to ammunition a means of identification by firearm
compatibility and the given names of their developer. Examples .32 S&W, .357 SIG, ete.

e Chain of Custody - a document or contemporaneous record attached to the packaging of an exhibit

showing its movement for the purposes of processing, examination and storage.


--- page break ---

03/2

e Exhibit - an object which is to be used by the submitting officer in a Court of Law as evidence in
any matter to which it relates.

e Exhibit Custodian - A police officer who is assigned to assist Police Armourers in the collection,
processing, storage and distribution of firearm exhibits.

e Firearm - as defined by the Firearm Act Chapter 16:01 as amended

e Firearm Examination - is the process of; (i) Identifying firearms and ammunition by their class
characteristics; and (ii) Function testing firearms to ascertain whether they operate as designed.

e Imitation Firearm - an object having the physical appearance of a patented firearm, but having
none of its components and incapable of discharging ammunition, which has been used in the
commission of a crime.

e Land - the raised portion between the grooves of the bore of a rifled barrel.

e Muzzle - the end of a firearms barrel from which a projectile or shot emerges.

e Prohibited Weapon - as defined by the Firearms Act Chapter 16:01 as amended and includes an
automatic firearm, conducted electrical weapon (CEW) or items capable of discharging chemical
irritants.

SUBMISSIONS

1. On being satisfied that firearm exhibits have resulted in criminal proceedings before a Court of Law or
is the subject of an ongoing enquiry they shall be received for examination at Specialist Evidence Recovery
Unit (S.E.R.U.) (D.O# 202/2007 refers) or Police Armoury. Submissions of all such exhibits must be done
within seven (7) days after the detection of an offence. Upon completion of processing by SERU, once an
examination by this Unit is required, the exhibit will be received by the Armoury outside of the
aforementioned timeline.

On receipt at the Armoury the assigned Police Officer/ Exhibit Custodian shall:

1) Issue submission forms to be completed in duplicate

2) Ensure that the form is properly completed with General Occurrence and SERU Numbers and the
date of hearing stated thereon.

3) Ensure the exhibit labels correspond with the submission forms noting the complainants identifying
marks.

4) Label the exhibit by assigning exhibit numbers and serial numbers according to the next available
number in the Exhibit Register in consecutive order.

5) Stamp and sign the submission forms, retaining the original and issuing the submitting officer with
the duplicate copy.

6) Make entries in the Station Diary and Exhibit Register.

7) Securely file Submission Forms

8) Secure exhibit in the approved storage area.
9) Indicate to the investigator a tentative date of completion based on available resources.


--- page break ---

03/3
STORAGE
2. The area where firearm exhibits are to be stored must be:

a) Adequately secured and suited for the purpose employed so as to prevent deterioration of the
packaging or its contents by either environmental hazards or vermin.

b) The rooms thereof must be of sturdy construction and fitted with high security padlocks and
intrusion detection systems.

c) The keys to these areas must be stored securely and access restricted to police officers assigned to
carry out that specific function.

d) All exhibits secured therein must be properly documented and accounted for in the relevant
Registers kept for this purpose.

REMOVAL FROM STORAGE
3. Exhibits should be retrieved from the storage area only on the instruction of a senior officer in the Firearm
Examination Section on the following occasions:

1) For examination by an Armourer.

2) For production in court by the complainant where the court so requires.

3) To be returned to the complainant after examination.

4) For submission to the Forensic Science Centre for scientific analysis relative to an investigation of
Homicide or Wounding.

5) On any other occasion as authorized in writing by the Executive officer with responsibility for
‘Criminal Division’.

EXAMINATION

4. The examination of firearm exhibits shall be carried out at designated locations by police officers duly
appointed as Police Armourers. The findings of Police Armourers shall be contained in a report, of the type
to be specified, and supplied to the officer submitting the exhibit on the completion of each examination.
The following procedures shall be adhered to in the examination of firearm exhibits;

a) Upon receipt of the exhibit from the assigned police officer the Armourer shall photograph same
before opening the packaging.

b) The Armourer should then open the packaging taking care to preserve markings already placed on
it.

c) Where upon examination the description on the submission form varies from the exhibit submitted,
the discrepancy must be noted and promptly brought to the attention of the complainant/submitting
officer.

d) Firearms should be checked to ensure it is free from live ammunition by following the Normal
Safety Procedure (NSP) applicable for an action or specific weapon type.


--- page break ---

03/4

e) In instances where ammunition is contained in the firearm the quantum, state (live, spent, damaged
etc.) and location of the ammunition must be recorded.

f) The Armourer shall reference the exhibits with the aid of appropriate literature, accredited websites
and the Armoury’s reference collection to establish make and model of firearms, the manufacturer
and designation of ammunition and component parts. During this process all legible characteristics
should be noted to assist in the accurate classification of the exhibits. These include all markings,
serial numbers, logos/ insignia, patent numbers, proof marks and measurements in the case of
firearms, and head stamps, composition and dimensions of ammunition. Calibre measurement shall
be done by measuring the barrel of a firearm at the muzzle end diametrically from land to land.
Ammunition shall be examined with specific reference to the characteristics of each cartridge
submitted in respect of make, calibre, composition and designation.

g) Where required, firearms shall be disassembled to identify component parts to aid in classification.

h) Component parts submitted by themselves may be fitted to reference firearms available to assist in
their identification where necessary. Accessories such as sound and flash suppressors shall be tested
where possible and the effects noted.

i) When Craft (home-made) firearms are submitted the following shall be noted:

I. Nominal calibre of barrel.
II. | The design is to be identified by generic weapon type.
III. | Component parts of the item are to be identified. The origin of the article and what it may
be adapted to function as.
IV. Identify the weapon type for which the components, when assembled, are designed to
function as.
V. Where it is possible to safely do so, the item shall be test fired and the result noted.
VI. In relation to findings the Armourer shall state an opinion, limited to, whether the item is
capable of falling within the definition of a firearm as defined by the Firearms Act Chapter
16:01, as amended.

j) All Armourers shall prepare work sheets of all firearms, ammunition, accessories and component
parts examined which will form part of the case file in relation to each exhibit. These shall include
measurements recorded with properly calibrated precision measuring instruments. All visual
abnormalities, adaptations, alterations, missing, damaged or broken parts shall be noted.

k) Where it is safe to do so, firearm exhibits shall be test fired and ballistic information (projectiles/
casings) retrieved for submission to the Forensic Science Centre for further analysis. During this
procedure only new ammunition shall be used to ensure there is no distortion of ballistic signatures.


--- page break ---

03/5
1) Where it is desirable that fired projectiles be retrieved the following bullet retrieval systems shall
be employed;
I. Horizontal water tank;
II. Snail® System Bullet trap; and
II. Cotton Box (5’)

m) On completion of an examination the Armourer shall place his identifying marks on the exhibit
(each item examined or an agreed proportion in relation to large ammunition exhibits) and reseal
the exhibit in its original packaging. Where the original packaging has been damaged and its
integrity compromised the item shall be repackaged but the original packaging retained.

n) Trinidad and Tobago Police Service firearms forming an exhibit shall not be engraved but plastic
evidence labels affixed thereto or a permanent marker used.

0) The Armourer shall prepare a concise word-processed report, of the specified type, for each exhibit
examined (duplicate).

p) The completed exhibit together with worksheets, forensic test fires and the prepared Armourer’s
Report shall be handed over to the assigned police officer for storage and filing pending collection
by the submitting officer.

q) All internal chain of custody documents shall be completed and the relevant signatures affixed at
the completion of the exhibit. No case file shall be filed incomplete.

r) Atall stages of the examination process the required personal protective equipment (PPE) must be
used.

s) At no time must the examination of more than one (1) exhibit be undertaken simultaneously
by an Armourer.

RETRIEVAL

5. Completed exhibits are to be handed over to collecting officers who are in possession of the duplicate
submission form supplied on receipt of exhibits.

A police exhibit custodian handing over such exhibit shall;

a) Verify the identity and capacity of the collecting officer.

b) Request and verify the particulars of the duplicate submission form or particulars of submission.

c) Retrieve the exhibit from the storage area.

d) Hand over the exhibit and Armourer’s Report to the collecting officer for verification.

e) Note and address any inconsistencies or queries made by the collecting officer.

f) After verification, stamp and sign both the original and duplicate submission forms.

g) Post and allow the collecting officer to sign the Exhibit Register.

h) Make entries in the Station Diary and update data entry records.

i) Securely file submission form in case file and archive.
i, a


--- page break ---

03/6
6. When a submitting officer or any other authorized person attempts to retrieve an exhibit and it has not
been completed, the exhibit custodian shall prepare and issue the appropriate form indicating the expected
date by which that exhibit shall be available.
7. “Collecting Officer” as mentioned refers to the submitting officer or any other person authorized in
writing to assist with the investigation/ prosecution of a matter.
8. Where the collecting officer is not in possession of the duplicate copy of the submission forms it must
be noted on the original.
9. Duplicate copies of Armourer’s Reports shall only be issued when authorized, in writing, by the
Executive officer with the responsibility for “Criminal Division’.
10. Collecting officers are to ensure that exhibits are lodged with the relevant Property Managers within
seventy-two (72) hours of collection and the requirements of S.O. 26 complied with.
11. On no account should private vehicles be used to transport firearm exhibits for the purposes of their
submission, collection or for presentation in Court.
12. Where a firearm exhibit is bulky an officer of or above the rank of Inspector shall ensure that adequate
transportation and security arrangements are in place for the safe movement of same for submission,
collection or for presentation in court.
Supervisors are to ensure investigators retrieve their Exhibit and Armourer’s Report from the Firearm
Management Unit within three (3) days of being informed of completion. Contact must be made within
forty eight (48) hours prior to the tentative completion date to verify completion. If same was not completed,
a new tentative date of completion must be given by the Exhibit Custodian and all protocols as
aforementioned shall be observed.
Compliance
Heads of Divisions/Branches/Sections are to ensure compliance through Divisional Orders, Circulars and
Lectures. Supervisors are mandated that investigators adhere to the instructions as set out in this
Departmental Order.
Review
This policy can be reviewed after the date of implementation and/or on such time and date as the
Commissioner may find necessary, also giving due consideration to any legislative changes.
PART a NIL
Commissioner of Police
