ee Police Orders by Mr. Gary Griffith
SOY Commissioner of Police
WS Police Administration Building
camer : Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
%> — Port of Spain
sir Tuesday 12" January, 2021.
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian employees of
the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
ee eee ee) EE
No. 04 Departmental Order PART I-NIL
PART =H
ESTABLISHMENT AND INCORPORATION OF
THE EMERGENCY RESPONSE PATROL (ERP
IN THE TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO POLICE SERVICE
INTENTION
To provide for greater mobile police visibility in Strategic prioritized areas and to establish a
comprehensive framework for the organization’s delivery of high quality service to its
customers and maintenance of safety and security in every community within Trinidad and
Tobago, through Rapid Responses to emergency calls leading to effective crime control,
therefore alleviating the fear of crime and rebuilding the public trust and confidence.
INTRODUCTION
The Emergency 999/Command Centre (E999/CC) was established via cabinet note No.2947-
2013/10/17 Note No. NS (13) 231 to operate within the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service (TTPS)
with the mandate of being the epiCentre for receiving and disseminating information in relation to
emergency calls and reports from the public throughout the TTPS including other Emergency Units
and Agencies. The E999/CC is supported in its core functions by the Divisional Operational Centre
(DOC), To improve the service currently being provided by the E999/CC and by extension the DOC,
and to keep up to date with the demands of modern-day policing.
There will now be an Emergency Response Patrol (ERP) which will be incorporated and become
part of the E999/CC. This new entity will now be known as the Emergency 999/Command Centre
and Emergency Response Patrol Branch (E999/CC and ERP Branch) and will be operational in
all nine (9) police divisions.
The Emergency Response Patrol (ERP) is now established within the Trinidad and Tobago Police
Service (TTPS) was officially launched on Friday 26" October 2018 by Mr. Garry Griffith the
Commissioner of Police (COP). It forms part of the main mobile patrol and emergency response
platform for the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service.
The ERP resources are to be strategically deployed and monitored by the E999/Command Centre
(CC) and respective Divisional Operations Centre (DOC) on a continuous basis to give effect to the
intention of this Order, which is greater police visibility and a rapid response to emergency calls for
service and other incidents which necessitates the immediate intervention of the police. It is
envisioned that this will have the ultimate effect of deterring crime and alleviating the fear of crime
in our country/communities whilst simultaneously rebuilding the public’s trust and confidence in the
TIPS.
cus


--- page break ---

04/2

PRESENT SANCTIONED STRENGTH
The sanctioned strength of the E999/Rapid Response Branch was established vide DO # 06/2017:

Y Supt | ASP. | Insp. | SGT. | CPL | PC. | TOTAL

i a eee eee ee ee
On the 26.10.18 the Commissioner of Police transferred a strength of 1 Sergeant, 2 Corporals and 18
Constables to the ERP vide DO # 131/18 from each of the nine (9) policing divisions. These ranks
must be transferred from the respective divisions as the official Sanctioned Strength to the ERP/E999
Branch
This sanctioned strength is mandatory for the efficient staffing and daily operational and effective Y
requirement of the E999/ERP Command Centre.
AMENDMENT TO SANCTIONED STRENGTH:
The Sanctioned Strength of the undermentioned Divisions is decreased by the following positions
with effect from (10.02.2021)

DIVISIONS RANKS NUMBERS

(oR RR AGU |
seen TT
As a result, the Sanctioned Strength of the E999/ERP is increased by the following positions with
effect from (10.02.2021)

E999/ERP Senior Superintendent ie ea ee

ale


--- page break ---

04/3

e The E999 Rapid Response Unit (RRU) will be rebranded and renamed Emergency Response
Patrol (ERP) all personnel, vehicles and any other equipment or resources from the E999 RRU
will be incorporated into the ERP.

e The ERP will provide the operational excellence in all nine police divisions.

e ERP vehicles will have a unique number and the letters of the Division to which they are
attached printed and easily visible. This will form the call sign for that particular vehicle.

e ERP resources must only be utilized for patrol and emergency response duties or other calls
for service which require an immediate police response and intervention, unless directed
otherwise by the Commissioners of Police, (COP), Deputy Commissioners of Police (DCP)
‘Operations’, Assistant Commissioner of Police (ACP) Specialized Support or Senior
Superintendent (Snr Supt) E999/CC and ERP.

ADMINISTRATIVE AND OPERATIONAL CONTROL OF THE ERP.

The Snr Supt E999/CC and ERP will have Administrative command of the Branch/Unit. Operational
command of the Divisional Emergency Response Patrol Units will fall under the purview of the
Divisional Commanders. However, the Operations Command Centre (OCC) or the E999 Command
Centre may at any time direct or redeploy ERP patrols as seen fit.

Duties and responsibilities.

The Snr Supt E999/CC and ERP in consultation with the Divisional Assistant Commissioner of Police
(ACP), will be responsible for the basing/staging area of the ERP within the nine (9) policing
divisions at strategic police stations to be approved by the Deputy Commissioner of Police
‘Operations’. The geographical size and composition of the division along with other logistical
requirements must be taken into account. In this regard a Division may have more than one basing/
staging area for the ERP.

e The Snr Supt/head of Divisions will be responsible for ensuring that whenever there exists a
shortfall of manpower required for patrols, that additional personnel from the Division are
detailed to supplement the ERP.

e The SDO i/c ERP within a Division will be responsible for ensuring that the patrol
requirements and mandates for that Division as it relates to time and area of patrols are met
based on crime data and intelligence provided by the Crime and Problem Analysis Branch
(CAPA), Special Investigations Unit (SIU) and other intelligence agencies or other competent
authority.

e The Snr Supt i/c Division or other police officers so detailed and the SDO i/c of the ERP
within that Division must communicate on a daily basis with regards to the time and area of
patrol and any other issue which impacts on the patrolling regime.

e The SDO i/c ERP within a Division must attend the Divisional Compstat as instructed by the
Snr Supt i/c Division or the Snr Supt i/c E999/CC and ERP.

e The SDO i/c ERP within a Division must parade and brief personnel at least 15 minutes before
their tour of duty.

/4


--- page break ---

04/4

e Personnel parading for briefing must do so in uniform, dressed in Patrol Order #4 and in
accordance with SO 6 in relation to appearance and turnout, be armed and in possession of all
other equipment necessary for patrol duty.

e The SDO i/c ERP must ensure that personnel proceeding on patrol are in possession of all
mandated personnel protection equipment.

e Vehicles must be checked in accordance with SO 49 prior to patrols.

e All personnel must be accounted for. Personnel late, sick and absent must be recorded and
the Snr Supt i/e E999/CC and ERP and Divisional Operational Centre (DOC) must be
informed.

PATROLS
Patrols must be performed in compliance with Standing Order 11 and any other lawful directives.
The following patrol, communication and reporting guidelines must be observed by patrols:

1. ERP personnel are not to conduct any enquiries or investigations beyond what is
required as being a first responder gathering or obtaining preliminary information.

2. On being paraded and dispatched the senior police officer on the ERP must inform the
Command Centre and DOC of their area and duration of patrol inclusive of the names
of officers, patrol vehicle/ call sign and wireless (WT) call number and secondary
means of communication. On completion of patrol duty, the Command Centre and
DOC must also be informed. As far as is practically possible, this shall be done by
wireless radio communication.

3. During their tour of duty/detail ERP personnel will be required to perform patrol duty
except where allowed by Regulation 66 subsection 3 of the Police Service Regulations
2007. (An officer shall not normally be required to be on duty beyond a period@of four
hours without having a break of at least one hour after the end of such period).

4. Patrols must be performed in a manner which facilitates interaction with members of
the public whilst allowing for the prevention and detection of infractions of the law.
Whenever practical to do so, ERP vehicles on patrol should have the door glasses
down and the AM/FM/radio off. Personnel on patrols are to limit the amount of time
spent on cell phones and other electronic devices and be alert at all times.

5. Police officers whilst on patrol and other related duties must be professional in their
conduct and provide a high level of customer service. The SDO i/e ERP must visit
patrols to ensure that they are being performed in the required manner.

6. During the patrol the E999/ERP Command Centre and DOC must be contacted by the
SDO i/c on the patrol every 30 minutes providing updates and location.

Sag


--- page break ---

04/5

7. The E999/ERP Command Centre and DOC must be informed when the patrol is
proceeding on and off refresh. This should include the police station at which the
refresh period will be spent. Refresh periods must be spent at the police station located
within the area of patrol.

8. The E999/ERP Command Centre and DOC must be informed whenever the police
officers are exiting the vehicle for any purpose.

9. All patrols must record the time of receiving communication and time of arrival on
any scene or location to any emergency call or call for service from the Command
Centre and DOC together with any other information as may be required on the
designated patrol form or any other means of recording information. The forms or
other means of recording must be properly filled out by the SDO i/c on each patrol.
On completion of patrol the completed patrol form or other means of recording must
be handed over or submitted to the SDO i/c ERP who will be responsible for the filing
or any other method as may become necessary for the collation and dissemination of
the patrol information.

10. Patrols within a Division, are not to leave their designated areas or patrol beats except
with permission or instruction from the E999/ ERP Command Centre or DOC.

11. In exceptional emergency circumstances, ERPs can be deployed from their designated
Divisional area of patrol to anywhere in the country. Whenever such instructions are
received from the Command Centre or DOC, they must be immediately complied
with. Permission or Instructions of this nature shall be authorized by either the
Commissioner of Police, Deputy Commissioner of Police ‘Operations’, Assistant
Commissioner of Police Specialized Support or Senior Superintendent E999/CC and
ERP. Where it becomes necessary for instructions to be given of this nature by the
E999/CC or DOC before the intervention of one of the authorized officers, they shall
be informed as soon as it is practical to do so.

12. The E999/ERP Command Centre and DOC will give directions or instructions 3
consistent with this policy to the ERP whilst they are on patrol. The E999/ERP
Command Centre and DOC must be aware at all times where the ERPs are located
within the Division to facilitate the dispatch of the nearest police vehicles to an
emergency call for service or other incident requiring a police response. The
E999/ERP Command Centre and DOC must utilize all available technology inclusive
of Global Positioning System (GPS) to coordinate and monitor vehicles.

13. Whenever a report of an emergency or any other call for service is received at the
E999/ERP Command Centre and or DOC, the ERP unit in closest proximity to the
location where the response is required must be immediately dispatched. Whenever
necessary other units/vehicles must also be dispatched.

14. All walk in emergency reports and calls to a police station including any other cases
which require a police response must be transmitted to the DOC who has responsibility
to immediately communicate with and dispatch the relevant ERP and other patrols.
The DOC must also immediately inform the Command Centre.


--- page break ---

04/6

15. All communications to the ERP must be done through the medium of the E999/ERP
Command Centre or DOC.

16. The E999/ERP CC has overriding control and may direct patrols to emergency calls
for service and other responses as and when it becomes necessary.

17. The SDO i/c ERP must debrief patrols on the completion of their tour of duty. All
equipment must be accounted for and vehicles checked. All responses to emergencies
or calls for service, or any arrests made must be accounted for in addition to any other
activities which occurred during the tour of duty.

ARRESTS WHILST ON ERP PATROL.

It must be noted that the intention of these guidelines is to allow the ERP police officers to resume
patrol duty as quickly as possible in order to ensure that the patrol regime is interrupted the least as
is practically possible. It is also intended to free up the patrolling officers from the time it takes to
process prisoners, prepare case files, convey exhibits for analysis, and attend court orderly room and
court. This is so that the intention of having high police visibility and a rapid response to emergency
calls for service is maintained as much as is practically possible.

The following procedure is to be followed whenever an officer performing ERP makes an arrest.

1. On arrest the prisoner/s and any exhibit must be conveyed to the police station in the district
where the offence was committed.

2. The E999/ERP Command Centre and the DOC must be informed of the arrest and the station
to which the prisoner is being conveyed. The FDO and SDO i/c of the said police station must
be informed of the arrest by the DOC.

3. On arrival at the police station the senior police officer will report to the SDO i/c station and
the prisoner/s will be handed over, along with any exhibits.

4. The SDO i/c of the police station must appoint an investigator who will prefer the relevant -
charges, process the prisoner, compile the file, attend court orderly room, attend court as the
complainant, convey exhibits for analysis and any other duty as it relates to being the
investigator and complainant in the said matter.

5. The arresting officer and any other police witness must provide a statement to the appointed
investigator before leaving to continue on patrol duty.

6. All necessary entries must be made in the police station diary.

7. When required, the arresting officer and other police witnesses must attend court to give
evidence in the matter.

GENERAL

e Whenever the ERP responds to an emergency call for service or any incident and same
requires an investigation or any follow up action, the SDO i/c of the relevant police station
must detail an investigator and cause the ERP to be relieved to continue on patrol duties.

oe


--- page break ---

04/7

e Police vehicles other than ERP vehicles whilst on other police duties inclusive of patrol duty
must respond to emergency calls for service or any other incident when they are in proximity
to do so or as directed by the E999/ERP Command Centre or DOC.

e ERP officers must not engage situations where their safety may be compromised for e.g. large
crowds or barricaded situations. In such circumstances the ERP’s role will be to assess and
provide feedback to the E999/ERP Command Centre and DOC whose role will be to inform
the relevant Police Station/Unit/Section/Branch and senior officers. The DOC can direct other
vehicles to scenes as necessary, however, the Command Centre has overall control to direct
responses.

e It must be recognized that the ERP is mandated to be the first responders to emergency calls
for service and other incidents in which a police response or intervention is required.

e Self-preservation is paramount in all cases. Whenever possible, police officers must avoid
becoming engaged in any situation in which they can become overwhelmed. When necessary
on arrival at an emergency call for service or other scene where the circumstances warrant
backup either from other patrolling units or other agencies, same must be immediately
communicated to the E999/ERP Command Centre and DOC.

e ERP vehicles will be dispatched in order of priority in relation to the nature of the call for
service, emergency or other incident.

The E999/CC and ERP Branch patrols will be highly structured and coordinated in its patrolling
regime and will be intelligence guided with support from other internal and external agencies.
PART III — NIL
Commissioner of Police
