ae. Police Orders by
Yaw Commissioner of Police
AGS = Police Administration Building
a ad Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
» ;
PRovecr anos Port of Spain
Wednesday 12" January, 2022.
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian employees of
the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
No. 04 Departmental Order PART I & I- NIL
PART II
NATIONAL OPERATIONAL TASK FORCE RECRUITMENT
The Commissioner of Police proposes to establish the National Operational Task Force (N.O.T.F)
within the Trinidad & Tobago Police Service.
OBJECTIVE:
The main goal of the (N.O.T.F) is aligned with the TTPS STRATEGIC GOAL #1 and aids with the
reduction of threat of crime perpetrated by criminal entities involved in the use of intimidating tactics,
terrorism, extortion, corruption and related violence associated with, but not limited to the use of
firearms, improvised explosive devices and explosives, illegal drugs and drug trafficking.
N.O.T.F will be the Support and Tactical Law Enforcement (T.L.E.) arm of the National Operations
Fusion Centre (N.O.F.C.) and exists to protect and serve the people of Trinidad and Tobago through
preparation, prevention, response and recovery from acts of terrorism and other serious crimes of
national significance.
The N.O.T.F will provide a standing Strike Element that can execute timely action to detect, deter,
prevent, respond and recover from Law Enforcement threats, through direct intervention in the form
of, but not limited to:
e Hostage rescue operations
e Barricade situation resolution
e Close Target Reconnaissance (CTR)
e Small Team Jungle Special Operations
e Assist in Anti/Counter terrorist operations
e High Risk Vehicle Interception
e Surveillance / Counter surveillance Operations
RECRUITMENT:
Officers desirous of being considered for transfer into this unit shall submit an application through the
Heads of Division / Branch/ Section to the Deputy Commissioner of Police Administration and
Operational Support, Police Administration Building, Cerner Edward & Sackville Street. Port of
Spain.
coke


--- page break ---

04/2
CORE COMPETENCIES:
> Demonstrate the ability to be significantly committed and dedicated to the job.
>» Adhere to the highest standards of conduct especially in maintaining honesty, confidentiality and
integrity.
> Maintain a high level of fitness necessary to complete the training and throughout the period of
the attachment.
REQUIREMENTS:
Officers desirous of being considered for recruitment into N.O.T.F will be required to:
1. Submit a written application to the Deputy Commissioner of Police ‘Administration and
Operational Support’.
2. Undergo a medical examination to be done by either the Police Medical Officer or a District
Medical Officer.
3. Undergo an assessment which includes the following:
e A physical evaluation
e A firearm assessment
e A Psychometric Evaluation
e Polygraph testing
e Drug testing
e Background & Security Vetting.
4. Submit two written recommendations, one of which MUST derive from a previous supervisor
who can attest to the applicant’s integrity, and character.
5. Attend an interview.
6. Oath of Secrecy
To ensure the highest standards of the Unit are maintained, successful candidates will be subjected to
continuous and random Polygraph and Drug testing.
The closing date for applications is Thursday 27 January 2022 at 3:00pm. NO LATE applications
will be entertained.
Commission i
;
