ae Police Orders by
y, Commissioner of Police
v8 Police Administration Building
ramoen Tana Paice Sovece Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
oy ,
Rorect ann sa Port of Spain
Thursday 13" January, 2022.
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian employees of
the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
ee gs
No. 05 Departmental Order PART 1 & I — NIL
PART II
Division of the Northern Division into Northern Division - ‘North’ and ‘North Central’
Division for Effective Management of Resources & Crime (DEMORC)
Establishment:
The Commissioner of Police has taken a strategic decision, following analysis and extensive consultation to
divide the Northern Division into ‘North’ and ‘North Central’. This initiative — Division for Effective
Management of Resources & Crime (DEMORC) will be done in the first instance as a Pilot Project and a
measurement of the impact of crime levels will be compiled over the period January to April 2022. Therefore
it is imperative that Commanders and Managers understand their span of control, and all Officers within the
Division continue to effectively fulfil the organisation’s mission.
Currently the Northern Division has a total of twelve (12) Police Stations which fall under the command of one
(1) Senior Superintendent. This initiative seeks to introduce an additional Senior Superintendent with the
main aims of workload management, increased efficiency and crime reduction
Goals:
In accordance with the goals outlined in the TTPS Strategic Plan 2019-2021 and the Operating Plan 2021, this
pilot project envisages the following positive outcomes:
e Reduction in violent crime
e Creating a safe environment for economic activity
e Increased safety in public places
e Increased public trust and confidence
e Community empowerment through police engagement
e Increased efficiency in the delivery of services to the public
see


--- page break ---

05/2

Information:
Northern Division (ND) is one of the nine (9) police divisions that comprise the system of police administration
and law enforcement throughout Trinidad and Tobago. Northern Division (ND) is located within the county of
St. George East and is bounded by the North Eastern Division on the North and West, Eastern Division on the
East and Central Division on the South. It entails several major roadways and is the main conduit with several
crucial access points to other districts. The geography of this Division provides an ideal opportunity for fluid
movement throughout the division and beyond. The Northern Division has both the Arima and the Tunapuna
Magistrate’s Court and is the location for the Country’s main Prisons and Detention Centres. Northern Division
can be considered as a major commercial nerve centre for business and economic activities which has evolved
into a major point of commute, particularly with the modification of the roadways and traffic infrastructure.
There has also been considerable growth in construction and shopping activities throughout the areas of
Tunapuna, Arouca and Arima. In addition to an increase in population there has been an increase in the
pervasiveness of crime and deviances. There are sixty-eight (68) primary schools, twenty-three (23) secondary
schools and thirteen (13) tertiary educational institutions, several recreational venues, tourist attractions,
sporting facilities and eight (8) major health care institutions located in the Northern Division.
Crime
Northern Division accounted for five hundred and ninety-four (594) murders or twenty-five (25) percent
of all murders over the five-year period 2017 to November 2021 and recorded over one hundred (100) murders
every year since 2017 escalating to one hundred and forty-one (141) in 2019. No other division crossed one
hundred (100) murders per year over the last five years. On average, the Northern Division recorded two
thousand, seven hundred and forty-seven (2,747) serious crimes annually over the last five (5) years, compared
to other Divisions.
Command & Manpower:
Of the nine (9) Divisions in the TTPS, Northern Division has the most police stations under its purview.
There are twelve (12) police stations in the Northern Division:

e Arima Police Station

e Arouca Police Station

e Cumuto Police Station

e La Horquetta Police Station

e Malabar Police Station

e Maloney Police Station

e Maracas St. Joseph Police Station

e Piarco Police Station

gla


--- page break ---

05/3
e Pinto Police Post
e San Raphael Police Station
e St. Joseph Police Station
e Tunapuna Police Station

Administrative Structure:

With immediate effect the Northern Division will be sub-divided into Northern Division —‘North’ and Northern
Division — ‘North Central’. A Senior Superintendent will be responsible for the command of each sub- division
now referred to as Senior Superintendent, Northern Division ‘North’ and Senior Superintendent, Northern
Division ‘North Central’.

Both Senior Superintendents ‘North’ and ‘North Central’ will be responsible for the administrative and
operational command of their station districts and will report to the Assistant Commissioner of Police ‘North-
East’.

Additionally, the responsibility of the management of the Divisional Personnel Records for Police Officers
attached to both Northern Division ‘North’ and Northern Division ‘North Central’ will rest with the Senior
Superintendent “North Central’’
The Police Stations attached to the Northern Division — ‘North’ and ‘North Central’ are as follows:
‘North’

e Arima Police Station

e Pinto Police Post

e Malabar Police Station

e La Horquetta Police Station

e San Raphael Police Sttion

e Cumoto Police Station

e Maloney Police Station
‘North Central’

e Arouca Police Station

e Piarco Police Station

e Tunapuna Police Station

e St Joseph Police Station

e Maracas St Joseph Police Station

../4


--- page break ---

05/4
Sanctioned Strength
Northern Division - ‘North’
Supt.

|SanctionStrength | | ot | 2 | 4 | 23 | 40 | 230 | 301 |
Actual Strength pam a Be a ne es |
Augmented Full Time SRP ] I 130 | 133
Strength
Augmented Part Time SRP 36 36
Strength

Northern Division - ‘North Central’
Snr A.S.P Sgt | Cpl | PC | Total
Supt.

[Sanction Strength = | | ot | 2 5 | 26 | 39 | 249 | 323 _|
Actual Strength Ree ie Ae ARIE be
Augmented Full Time SRP 2 l 2 104 109
Strength
Augmented Part Time SRP Z, 2 2 43
Strength

Offices:

The Divisional Headquarters remains in the Northern Division ‘North Central’ region and is located at the

St. Joseph Police Station.

The Administrative Office for the Northern Division ‘North’ region is located at the Arima Police Station
aad


--- page break ---

05/5
Summary of Administrative Re-Alignment
oS = ‘North’ ‘North Central’
e Seven (7) police stations _ e@ Five (5) police stations
Number of Police : —
Stations =
e Arima Court _ @ Tunapuna Court
Judiciary : a
e Arima District Hospital = =e Caura Hospital
Health Services e Arima Diagnostic Clinic _@ Mt. Hope Women’s
© Arima Rehabilitation Centre | ‘Bric Williams Medical
ee : Sciences Complex
— _ @ Medical Associates
: _ @ St. Augustine Private
5 Hospital
e Primary Schools (29) —e_- Primary Schools (39)
Education e Secondary Schools(7)  =—— Secondary Schools (16)
e Tertiary Education Institutes |e Tertiary Education
(3) =o Institutes (10)
Business Parks Business Parks
DU OUEMS 86@ §=©6TamanaIn Teck Park _ e  Trincity Business Park
e O'Meara Industrial Estate = =e _‘Trincity Industrial Estate
Service Stations (7) = Service Stations (13)
Shopping Malls . Shopping Malls
e Shops of Arima -—- @-~-: Trincity Mall
@ O'Meara Plaza : e Bhagwansingh Hardware
@ Xtra Plaza = e  Piarco Plaza
e Food Basket — - @ Shops at Trincity
oe ne @ Valpark Shopping Plaza
-@-~—s Grand Bazaar Mall


--- page break ---

e National Science Centre e Caura River
Recreational e Aripo River : e Lopinot River/Historical
Activities e Asa Wright Nature Centre _ Complex
e@ Cleaver Woods Park e Mt. St. Benedict
e Santa Rosa Race Track e Centre of Excellence
e Wallerfield International
Raceway >
e Arima Velodrome e Marvin Lee Stadium
Sporting Activities e Larry Gomes Stadium e La Joya Sporting
e@ Maloney Regional Complex — Complex
e Arima Savannah : e Eastern Regional Sports
Arena
-__ @ ~—- Eddie Hart Savannah
: e Constantine Park
e Immigration Detention Centre e Golden Grove Prison
National Security e Eastern Regional Correctional e Maximum Security Prison
Centre Se _@ Remand Yard
— = Se e Women’s Prison
SS e Youth Training Centre
e Government (5) | e Government (5)
e Private(16) e Private (15)
Communities
e Government (5) : e Government (5)
e Private (16) e Private (15)
e Ready Mix Road, e Bon Air Park, Arouca (60
Guanapo, Arima Units)
Resilential (Private) - e Bon Air North Housing
Conarianities e Carina Gardens (116 Development (399 Units)
Units) == e Real Springs, Valsayn
e Mandalay Gardens, South (408 Units)
Arima (Private) e North Grove, SMR,
- @_ Trestrail, D’Abadie — Curepe (504 Units)
(1,204 Units) e Mahogany Court, Mt.
e Nepuyo Court, Hope (160 Units)
Malabar (90 Units)


--- page break ---

i)
Open Door Policy
This strategic decision does not seek to interfere with the structure of the TTPS Open Door Policy which was
introduced to allow members of the public to make reports at any station district and subsequently transferred
to the Station District / Division concerned.
Organisational Chart attached
ommissioner of Police


--- page break ---

|
ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISIONAL
A OFFICE
SUPERINTENDENT NORTH SUPERINTENDENT NORTH
CENTRAL
A.S.P NORTH A.S.P NORTH CENTRAL
ARIMA POLICE PINTO POLICE MALABAR LA HORQUETTA AROUCA POLICE PIARCO POLICE TUNAPUNA
STATION | POST POLICE STATION POLICE STATION STATION STATION POLICE STATION
SAN RAPHAEL CUMUTO POLICE || MALONEY TASK FORCE ST. JOSEPH MARACAS ST. TASK FORCE
POLICE STATION | | STATION POLICE STATION POLICE STATION | JOSEPH POLICE
STATION
2
es
