Police Orders by
cS Commissioner of Police
am Police Administration Building
ran Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
oll ie Port of Spain
irr eraoe Monday 18, January, 2021
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian
Employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
Authority: Section 193 (1) of the Police Service Regulations, 2007
No.08 Departmental Order
PART I- NIL
PART-II
ESTABLISHMENT OF A POLICY ON THE EXPUNGING OF CRIMINAL RECORDS
UNDER THE DANGEROUS DRUG ACT (AS AMENDED) ACT 24 OF 2019
INTENTION
For the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service to provide the appropriate guidelines, and the
authority for the expunging of records as outlined in the Dangerous Drugs Act (as amended) (Act
No. 24 of 2019) therefore delivering quality service to both our internal and external customers
while rebuilding the public’s trust and confidence
INTRODUCTION
There is to be a National Fingerprint Database as provided for under Section 50K of the Police
Service Act Chapter 15:01 which states:
“50K. (1) There is hereby established a database of analyzed fingerprint impressions
collected under this Act, to be known as the “National Fingerprint Database”.
(2) The Commissioner shall have control and custody of the National Fingerprint Database
and shall, in accordance with this Act, add to and remove data from the National
Fingerprint Database.


--- page break ---

(3) Where a fingerprint impression is taken from a person who is exonerated, the data
from the fingerprint impression shall be destroyed and removed from the National
Fingerprint Database, after the expiration of twenty years from the date of exoneration.
(emphasis ours)

(4) Notwithstanding the destruction of a fingerprint impression under section 50J, where
data from a fingerprint impression is retained from the period of the destruction of the
fingerprint impression to the twenty-year period at subsection (3), the data from the
fingerprint impression is deemed to be the data related to the fingerprint impression
destroyed and the data may be used as evidence in any matter involving the person to whom
the data relates.”

AUTHORITY

Act No. 24 of 2019, which is the Dangerous Drugs (Amendment) Act, 2019, is the Act
which introduced the expunging of criminal convictions, depending on the amount of
cannabis or cannabis resin. Section 5D (3) states as follows:

“(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of section 50K of the Police Service Act, any offence
on the criminal record of a person prior to the commencement of the Dangerous Drugs
(Amendment) Act, 2019, for the possession of not more than one_hundred grams of
Cannabis or not more than fourteen grams of cannabis resin shall be expunged by the
Commissioner of Police (emphasis ours).

(4) A person-who has been convicted for the possession of not more than one hundred
grams of cannabis or not more than fourteen grams of cannabis resin may apply to the
Commissioner of Police to have that offence expunged from his criminal record.

(5) A person who has had an offence expunged from his criminal record under subsection

(3) or (4) may, in respect of that offence, shall apply for a pardon under section 87 of the

Constitution. ”


--- page break ---

Section 87 of the Constitution of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago states as
follows:
“87. (1) The President may grant to any person a pardon, either free or subject to lawful
conditions, respecting any offences that he may have committed. The power of the
President under this subsection may be exercised by him either before or after the person
is charged with any offence and before he is convicted thereof.
(2) The President may—
(a) grant to any person convicted of any offence against the law of Trinidad and
Tobago a pardon, either free or subject to lawful conditions;
(b) grant to any persona respite, (relief) either indefinite or for a specified period,
from the execution of any punishment imposed on that person for such an offence;
(c) substitute a less severe form of punishment for that imposed by any sentence
for such an offence; or
(d) remit the whole or any part of any sentence passed for such an offence or any
penalty or forfeiture otherwise due to the State on account of such an offence.
(3) The power of the President under subsection (2) may be exercised by him in accordance
with the advice of a Minister designated by him, acting in accordance with the advice of
the Prime Minister.”


--- page break ---

ADMINISTRATIVE AND OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT FOR
PROCESSING APPLICATIONS FOR EXPUNGING OF CRIMINAL
RECORDS UNDER THE DANGEROUS DRUGS ACT (AS AMENDED)

ACT 24 OF 2019
The authority for the expunging of records are outlined in the Dangerous Drugs Act (as amended)
Act No. 24 of 2019), this is therefore the following process that should be adopted for the
expunging of person’s records as follows:

a) An application must be made to the Commissioner of Police in accordance with the provisions
as stipulated in Act 24 of 2019 Sec. SD ss3

b) Along with the application, the recent court extract giving a determination of the matter must
be attached to the aforementioned application

c) The said application should be minuted to the Senior Superintendent Criminal Investigations
Department/Division outlining the facts with the authority showing the authority for the
request.

d) This application should be forwarded to the First Division Officer in charge of the Criminal
Records Office within the particular Region with the Commissioner’s instructions.

e) The aforementioned application should then be sent to the Commissioner of Police advising
that his authority is required as per the Act Sec 5D ss3 & 4 24 of 2019 to have the records
of the particular applicant expunged.

f) On the application being returned to the Criminal Records Office (within 7 days) the applicant
will next be issued with a New Certificate of Character eliminating that particular charge at
the prescribed cost.

g) If persons apply directly to the Commissioner, the documents will be sent to the ASP. CRO
via the Snr Supt CID/CRO and the process according to the laws outlined will be adopted.

h) The reason for issuing of the new Certificate of Character is to have the applicant apply for a
presidential pardon as provided for in the Act Se. 5D ss 5.


--- page break ---

METHODOLOGY
It must be noted that the expunging of the records, does not mean destruction of the fingerprints.
It is the removal of the offence from the file of the individual. A person’s record is stored (filed)
digitally and on hard copy. They can be stored on the Main Filing System, on a Dossier and on
the Versadex (RMS)
The process (at the Criminal Records Office) for expunging one’s criminal record under Act No.
24 of 2019 is as follows:
I. | Name Check of the Applicant
Il. | Obtain Criminal Record (CR) number
Ill. Verify the offence with the information provided
IV. Consult with a SDO i/c Records or Sgt Administration CRO or a Ranked supervisor at this
stage. No constable is to proceed beyond this point without clearance.
V. Once clearance is given;

(a) Pull Main Print write on the Top Right Hand corner of the print EXPUNGED ON
(Date) in red ink and sign same, refile the fingerprint on the Main Filing System

(b) Obtain Dossier; write on the print for that particular offence on the Top Right Hand
corner of the print EXPUNGED ON (Date) in red ink and sign same. The request
for expunging is to be folioed on the said dossier.

(c) Take Dossier to the person with authority for deletion; The file is to be updated for
only that offence by indicating EXPUNGED in like manner as in currently being done
for the presidential pardon.

V1. The documentation with the instructions are to be resent via the channel it came to the
Commissioner of Police Office.
applied for and meets the requirement under the Act No. 24 of 2019 is to be expunged.
a
Commissioner of Police
