er Police Orders by Mr. Gary Griffith
it Site Commissioner of Police
UKE ; Police Administration Building
TEatpnnpiitcle Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
Oibien sama Port of Spain
ne Thursday 21% January, 2021.
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian employees of
the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
_-_————————————eeeseses—‘“
No. 11 Departmental Order PART | - NIL
PART II
AMENDED RE-ESTABLISHMENT and RE- ORGANIZATION OF THE LEGAL
——va ES eee a and KE- ORGANIZATION OF THE LEGAL
UNIT
Departmental Orders No. 80 of 2019 and No. 67 of 2020 are hereby rescinded.
1. GENERAL INFORMATION

1.1 The Commissioner of Police and the management of the Trinidad and Tobago Police
Service has re-established and re-organized a newly transformed Legal Unit in the
service with effect from Thursday 17" April 2019, as part of the ongoing transformation
process.

1.2 The Director of Legal Services shall be hereby and hereafter referred to as the Head
Legal Services who shall report to the Commissioner of Police and there shall now be
established an Office of the Head Legal Services.

1.3. The Head Legal Services shall be responsible for the overall management and operation
of the Legal Unit, which shall include, Legal Officers, the Monitoring and Compliance
Unit, Business Office Assistants, Support and Administrative Staff.

1.3.1 All Legal Officers assigned to the Legal Unit shall report directly to the Head Legal
Services and shall only carry out the duties prescribed in this Departmental Order or any
other duty assigned by the Commissioner of Police or the Head Legal Services.

1.4 The Legal Officers attached to the Legal Unit shall consist of persons who are qualified
as Attorneys at Law ONLY and who are assigned to the Legal Unit by the
Commissioner of Police or the Head Legal Services. *

1.4.1 The Legal Officers attached to the Legal Unit shall be the persons listed in Schedule 1,
appended to this Departmental Order and any other Legal Officers who may be
appointed from time to time and shall be effected through a Departmental Order. The

> Commissioner of Police may rescind or revoke the appointment of a Legal Officer
assigned to the Legal Unit.

1.5. The Commissioner of Police or the Head Legal Services shall assign Legal Officers to
each Division, Specialist Units/Sections in the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service, as
they deem appropriate.

1.6 The Trinidad and Tobago Police Service has a fundamental duty to establish support
systems, methods and structures to effectively manage its human, material and financial
resources.


--- page break ---

11/2
2. INTENTION
The intention of this order is to apprise members of the Trinidad and Tobago Police
Service of the re-establishment and re-organization of the Legal Unit, thus transforming
the service into a more efficient and effective organization. It is also to clearly establish
the duties and responsibilities of the Legal Officers and the Compliance and Monitoring
Unit.

3. ADMINISTRATION

3.1 Legal Officers assigned to Divisions/Branches and Specialist Units/Sections shall
perform legal duties as set out hereinafter or any other duties assigned ONLY, or unless
otherwise directed by the Commissioner of Police or Head Legal Services.

3.2 Legal Officers assigned to Divisions/Branches and Specialist Units/ Sections are
generally required to perform legal duties during the working hours of 8:00 a.m. to
4:30 p.m., Mondays to Fridays or as otherwise directed by the Commissioner of Police
or the Head Legal Services, and shall report to the Commissioner of Police or the Head
Legal Services once called upon or when required to do so.

3.3. Legal Officers may be permitted to engage in private non-contentious matters, which do
not cause a conflict of interest and SHALL NOT engage in private contentious matters
nor appear in any Court in any jurisdiction unless it is on behalf of the Commissioner of
Police or the State.

3.4 Heads of Division/Branches and Specialist Units/Sections shall facilitate and assist Legal
Officers to ensure that ALL Freedom of Information (FOI) requests, Pre-action Protocol
Letters, Habeas Corpus Writs, Judicial Review matters and all other matters within the
deadline as prescribed Non adherence shall be considered disobedience to orders.

3.4.1 Where the timeframe specified for a response as required by 3.4 cannot be adhered to, it
shall be the duty of the Heads of Divisions/Branches/Specialist Units/Sections, or Legal
Officers to inform the Head Legal Services in writing within seven (7) days of receipt
of the said requests and such response shall stipulate when the requested information
will be provided.

3.4.2 Where matters of an urgent nature arise, such as Writs of Habeas Corpus and other
Emergency Applications of the Court, the information requested at 3.4 shall be provided
upon request of same forthwith and failure to do so shall be considered disobedience to
orders.

3.5 Heads of Division/Branches and Specialist Units/Sections shall ensure that proper
accommodation, including office facilities, furniture and other relevant materials, are
provided to Legal Officers attached to the specific Division/Branches and Specialist
Units/Sections.

3.6 Heads of Divisions/Branches and Specialist Units/Sections as well as Second Division
Officers in charge, shall ensure that every file is perused by the relevant Second Division
Officer in charge of the Police Officer submitting the said file, with associated
recommendations, before being forwarded to the Legal Officer for his/her opinion and
advice in instances before charges are preferred, and not after.

ile


--- page break ---

11/3

3.7. Heads of Divisions/Branches and Specialist Units/Sections as well as Second Division
Officers in charge, shall ensure that once charges are laid, there is adherence to the
Criminal Procedure Rules as amended from time to time, as well as all Standing Orders
and prevailing laws of Trinidad and Tobago, for example:

» The provision of initial details. ie. Summary of Evidence

" References previously made to the charged persons as “Defendant” should
now be replaced with “Accused”.

« Every document to be produced to the Court shall be letter sized paper
approximately 11 inches long by 8.5 inches wide, as far as practicable.

« Standing Order10(5)(1)(a) which requires submission of case files within one
(1) week after the institution of criminal proceedings.

3.7.1 Heads of Divisions/Branches and Specialist Units/Sections as well as Second Division
Officers in charge shall ensure that all case files where the accused or suspect is
remanded into custody is complete and submitted within seven (7) days of preferring a
charge against the accused.

4. FUNCTIONS OF LEGAL OFFICERS

Legal Officers shall perform the following functions; -

4.1. Assist and advise on all legal issues when required in the Divisions/Branches/Units/Sections

4.2 Attend Court and represent the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and the Commissioner of
Police when delegated to do so;

4.3 Attend Tribunals and represent the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and the Commissioner
of Police when delegated;

4.4 Prepare legal opinions and submissions when required to do so and only if necessary, forward
to the Legal Unit thereafter;

4.5 Respond to legal correspondence when required to do so;

4.6 Respond to Freedom of Information requests received from the Office of the Head Legal
Services

4.7 Assist Police Prosecutors in the Magistrate’s Court with cases that involve technical/difficult
legal issues. This includes appearances, submissions, written or oral; 4

4.8 Assist in the training of Police Prosecutors;

4.9 Lecture to members of the Police Service on legal matters relevant to the Trinidad and Tobago
Police Service and assist in the preparation of legal training materials and programmes for the
Police Training College/Academy. This must be done with the approval of the Commissioner
of Police or the Head Legal Services.

4.10 Draft Part II Orders for the Commissioner of Police;

./4


--- page break ---

11/4
4.11 Peruse every’file of a serious/complex nature (high profile matters) and advise before charging
and assist/guide Police Officers with regard to offences and the ingredients necessary to
establish same, together with the legal requirements in the conduct of such investigations,
thereby increasing the possibility/chance of successful prosecution of these offences;
4.12 Screen and assist in the preparation of case files for transmission to the Office of the Director
of Public Prosecutions to improve the quality of same;
4.13 Assist Police Officers in the preparation of documents for paper committal proceedings;
4.14. Prepare affidavits and submissions particularly in matters of Writs of Habeas Corpus and
receive and take instructions, relevant to the Writs of Habeas Corpus Applications;
4.15 Any other duty assigned by the Commissioner of Police or Head Legal Services.
5 ESTABLISHMENT OF COMPLIANCE AND MONITORING UNIT
5.1 There shall be established under the command and portfolio of the Head Legal Services
a Compliance and Monitoring Unit.
5.2 Key Objectives: To create a Unit made up of Police Officers and civilian staff to fulfill
the following duties as delegated from time to time under the directions of the Head
Legal Services, namely;

I. To follow up on Freedom of Information (FOI) requests, respond to requests and ensure
that compliance or refusal of such requests are fulfilled within the requisite statutory
time frame or to seek an extension of time in appropriate circumstances.

Methodology: Daily and weekly communication with Divisions, Branches and
Specialist Units/Sections via email, official correspondence, and official telephone
messages.

Rationale: This is intended to facilitate all Freedom of Information (FOI) requests and
to avoid unnecessary Judicial Review actions being instituted against the Trinidad and
Tobago Police Service and by extension the Commissioner of Police for failure to
adhere to their statutory duty.

Il. To comprehensively trace, track and report on all Court matters against the
Commissioner of Police, which shall be divided into different categories, namely:
Judgments to be Executed, Matters for Trial, Existing Matters and New Matters.
Methodology. Members of the Unit shall be assigned to the various matters to ensure
that everything, which is required to be fulfilled on the part of the Commissioner of
Police, is completed in a timely manner for Court. These shall include, assisting in
disclosure of documents, making copies, attending Court and making copious notes of
the progress of the assigned cases, as well as comments by the judicial officers.

Rationale: To efficiently and effectively manage the systemic flow of legal actions
taken against the Commissioner of Police, in matters of promotion, sick leave
classifications and Freedom of Information (FO) requests. It will also seek to avoid or
limit negative outcomes which may have a negative effect on the Trinidad and Tobago
Police Service, which can be prevented by the implementation of proper case
management.

om


--- page break ---

11/5

Ill. To Monitor all media reports whether electronic, print or otherwise, wherein adverse
reports are made about errant Police Officers acting upon a frolic of their own.
Methodology: Using all forms of media and closely monitoring for infractions by
Police Officers. Thereafter, a report is prepared along with legal advice and sent to the
Commissioner of Police for the implementation of disciplinary proceedings against the
offending Police Officer.
Rationale: To significantly reduce and subsequently eradicate all arbitrary, corrupt and
reckless practices of Police Officers.

IV. To vigorously monitor Magistrates Court matters which are dismissed for the non-
appearance of police complainants.
Methodology: The staff of the unit shall comprehensively track and report on all
Magistrates’ Court matters whilst also consulting with Court Prosecutors and in
particular, paying special attention to matters in which police complainants who
habitually fail to attend court. Once a matter is discharged or dismissed for want of
prosecution owing to the non-attendance of a police complainant, a report will be
prepared by the staff of the Unit along with a report from the Police Court Prosecutor,
who shall produce same immediately upon the request of the staff of the Unit. These
reports shall be submitted for the attention of the Commissioner of Police to take the
appropriate action.
Rationale: Too many matters are falling by the wayside due to the non-appearance of
Police Officers at Court, which is a direct dereliction of their duty, particularly when
attending Court is of the utmost importance.

6. COMMUNICATION

6.1 Heads of Divisions/Branches/Units are to submit to the Head Legal Services on a
monthly basis, a return on the work performance and conduct of Legal Officers so
assigned or otherwise directed by the Commissioner of Police and the Head Legal
Services.

6.2. Heads of Divisions//Branches/Units shall ensure that the Legal Officer peruses all files
that are being forwarded to the Office of the Head Legal Services and the Director of
Public Prosecutions.

6.3. Legal Officers and Police Officers shall liaise with the office of the Director of Public
Prosecutions wherever and whenever so required, but, SHALL NOT submit files,
reports and correspondence directly to the Director of Public Prosecutions without first
submitting same to the Head Legal Services for his subsequent approval.

6.4 _—_ Heads of Divisions/ Branches/ Units/Sections SHALL NOT permit Legal Officers and
Police Officers to submit files, reports and correspondence directly to the Director of
Public Prosecutions without first submitting same to the Head Legal Services for his
subsequent approval or otherwise directed by the Commissioner of Police and the Head
Legal Services.

.../6
a


--- page break ---

11/6

6.5 No Police Officer shall prefer a charge against ANY person in any matter which involves
a matter of high public interest, a public official and or any other matter of a sensitive
nature, without consulting/informing the Commissioner of Police or Head Legal
Services.

6.5.1 For the removal of doubt, if any Police Officer is unsure about the persons referred to in
6.5 it shall be the duty of every such Police Officer, to communicate with the office of
the Head Legal Services, in order to acquire clarity.

6.6 Where the Director of Public Prosecutions has advised that a charge be preferred against
a person referred to in 6.5, the Police Officer preferring the charge must immediately
inform the Commissioner of Police or the Head Legal Services before the charge is
preferred.

6.7. Where any Legal Officer submits or provides legal opinions or advice and the Heads of
Divisions/Branches/Units/Sections or Second Division Officer in charge, disagrees with
that advice, they shall submit both legal opinions or positions to the Office of the Head
Legal Services for the Head Legal Services to make a final determination on the matter.

7. CONCLUSION

The re-establishment and re-organization of this unit will significantly enhance the
management of the Police Service, thus improving its crime fighting capability as well
as optimize the efficiency and effectiveness of the legal unit in the Trinidad and Tobago
Police Service, thereby promoting confidence and regaining public trust.
PART Il] — NIL
Commissioner of Police
4
: i


--- page break ---

Schedule 1
List of Legal Officers
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO POLICE SERVICE LEGAL OFFICERS
18380 | Const. Yohan Niles Attorney-at-Law Office of the Director of
Legal Services
14201 | Sgt. Ramsaran Attorney-at-Law Office of the Director of
Legal Services
10276 | WPC Kara Fletcher Attorney-at-Law Professional Standards
Bureau
14150 | W/Sgt. Janelle Gonzales- Attorney-at-Law Court & Process (POS)
Lewis
16980 Irvin Joseph Court & Process (POS)
16136 Vinelle Bassarath Fraud Squad
14036 | Insp. Byron Michael Attorney-at-Law ACIB
Daniel
17275 Keston Abraham Financial Intelligence Bureau
18751 Julie Gonzales Police Training Academy
16652 Kerry Lumpress Police Training Academy
16164 Deoraj Harripersad North Eastern Division
18125 Sheldon Salazar South Western Division
13631 | W.Cpl. | Sookram Loutan Attorney-at-Law CID Case Mgt.
Old Police HQ
Unit


--- page break ---

fe isaac 3d SS
THE LEGAL UNIT
Team (SORT)
,
