(ey Police Orders by
i Commissioner of Police
Police Administration Building
WW, Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
oss HOON FOLGE somes Port of Spain
Perorecr aos Wednesday 17" August, 2022.
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian employees of
the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
No. 141 Departmental Order PART I & DI-NIL
PART II
DIVISIONAL GANG UNIT AND DIVSIONAL GANG REGISTRY
PURPOSE
To establish Divisional Gang Units (DGU) and their supporting Divisional Gang Registries
(DGR) across all police divisions within the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service (TTPS).
INTRODUCTION
The escalating levels of crime and the increased sophistication of gang related activity
required the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service to radically change its approach in the fight
against crime, as the traditional methods of treating with gangs and gang related activity were
severely deficient in meeting the needs of society. The slow pace and development of
operational capability to evade detection and prosecution resulted in an upsurge in serious
crimes resulting in a rapid deterioration of the fabric of society.
As a result, a PILOT project was launched in the Central Division, referred to as the Central
Division Gang Unit (CDGU), and based on their use of operational and technological
initiatives, which led to massive success in compiling gang related intelligence and reducing
gang related activity within the Central Division, a need for total initialisation was realised
throughout all policing divisions, thereby creating the DGU and DGR.
OBJECTIVE
The DGU and DGR are both geared toward suppressing criminogenic issues by targeting
Priority Offenders with the aim of systematically identifying and prosecuting individuals who
commit serious crimes and in particular gang related activity. This is expected to reduce their
opportunity to perpetrate any further crimes of this nature, resulting in an overall reduction in
violent crime and general fear of crime in Trinidad and Tobago
The DGU in each police division shall capture real-time information and intelligence
investigations into gangs and persons involved in organized crimes. The DGR, an ancillary
unit, would conduct the analysis and serve as a repository for all gang intelligence. Gang
intelligence shall be used to support divisional operations and to meet legitimate
informational needs of other agencies with valid need-to-know and right-to-know
authorization.
../2


--- page break ---

141/2
JUSTIFICATION
Under the pillar of public safety and the maintenance of law and order, the establishment of
the DGU & DGR is in keeping with the goals and objectives of the TTPS Strategic Plan
2022-2024. With the aim to restore public trust, this initiative will shape the police response
to local gang problems within each division of Trinidad and Tobago. The production and
dissemination of intelligence gathered at the divisional level is highly valued and can be
utilized by both internal and external stakeholders for criminal investigations and
prosecutions, plans and policies for the reduction of serious and violent crimes.
CORE MANDATE
The main directive of the Divisional Gang Units is to gather information with the aim of
investigating and prosecuting ali persons involved in gang related activities and serious
crimes within their respective divisions with an aim of disrupting their illegal activities.
The First Division Officer in charge of the Special Investigations Unit (STU) shall have
operational oversight and may exercise supervisory jurisdiction regarding information
gathered and investigations into gangs and persons involved in serious crimes conducted by
the DGU. All intelligence would be sent to the SIU as a central repository for all gang
intelligence.
DEFINITIONS
Alert: A hastened notice that informs a station, division, section, unit, to be vigilant of
imminent threats to individual[s], businesses, communities. The contents of an alert
constitute clear, present or pending information on security risk or of a specific planned
action that can lead to loss of lives or threats to national security itself. An alert is of a
sensitive nature and can only be issued by an Authorized Division Officer. These alerts will
be disseminated either verbally or digitally by the First Division Officer in charge of the
respective Divisional Gang Unit.
Advisory: A notice that cautions a station, division, section or unit, with intelligence or data
of criminal activity occurring in their purview. An advisory is issued verbally or digitally by
the First Division Officer in charge of the respective Divisional Gang Unit and entails
recommendation of action to be taken with an aim of investigation and prosecution.
Bulletin: A notice issued by the First Division Officer in charge of the respective DGU that
serves to inform a specific station of individual crime groups or occurrences in a division.
Criminal Activity Report (CAR): A form used to record suspicious or suspected criminal
activity. The C.A.R. form is utilized within each division. CARs shall be reviewed and
evaluated by the DGU and DGR and information of value shall be developed and
investigated or forwarded to the appropriate Division/ Section/ Branch within the Trinidad
and Tobago Police Service (TTPS) or an appropriate agency external to TTPS.
Division Authorized Officer: means the Senior Superintendent of any Division or any First
Division Officer authorized by him.

AB


--- page break ---

141/3

DCP Gang COMPSTAT: A meeting held with the DCP ‘Intelligence and Investigations’,
every three (3) months with all ACPs in charge of Divisions, the Senior Superintendent
‘Special Investigations Unit’, ALL Divisional Commanders, or any First Division Officer
sanctioned by him; the Senior Superintendent or First Division Officer. This meeting shall
focus on information sharing and is geared towards improving the effectiveness of the
Divisions. The meetings should include four generally recognized core components: (1)
Timely and accurate information or intelligence; (2) Distribution of resources; (3) Effective
tactics; and (4) Follow-ups.
Gang: A combination of two or more persons, whether formally or informally organized,
who engage in gang-related activity, in accordance with the Anti-Gang Act No 04 of 2021.
Gang COMPSTAT: A meeting held with the Assistant Commissioner of Police that
oversees the respective Divisions, along with their Divisional Commanders, every two (2)
months. This meeting shall focus on the achievement of police division goals. The meeting is
geared towards improving the effectiveness of the DGU/DGR and should include four
generally recognized core components: (1) Timely and accurate information or intelligence;
(2) Distribution of resources; (3) Effective tactics; and (4) Follow-ups.
Gang related activity- means any of the offences listed in the First Schedule [of the Anti-
Gang Act No 4 of 2021] which a gang leader or gang member plans, directs, orders,
authorises or requests including;

a. An attempt to commit the offence

b. The aiding, abetting, counselling or procuring of the offence or

c. Conspiracy to commit the offence
Need to know- A person who is requesting information and is proven to be actively involved
in a criminal investigation on the information being sought.
Priority Offender: A persistent reoffender who cycles through the criminal justice system
for serious and violent crimes. An offender whose behaviour significantly impacts the crime
rate or the fear of crime in a community. An offender who has the capacity to carry out
serious offences and, as a result, demands the focus of law enforcement. A priority offender
has, within the previous five-year period, repeatedly contributed to one or more violent or
serious crimes carrying a term of imprisonment of 7 years or more. See Schedule 1
Priority Offender Listing: A list of priority offenders or crime groups that have gone
through an acceptable rubric of analytical qualification, which includes short-term priority
listings and mid to long-term priority listings. Short-term priority listings are based on
specific violence index indicators and mid to long-term priority listings are based on the
offender’s sophistication or complexity of the crime committed. This listing shall be
produced monthly by the D.G.R. and presented to the Senior Superintendent of any Division
or any First Division Officer sanctioned by him for both DCP COMPSTAT and Gang
COMPSTAT.

./4


--- page break ---

141/4

Right to Know- A person acting in an official capacity and is a designated representative or

is a representative from a law enforcement agency belonging to a network or association with

the Division.
Main Functions and Responsibilities of the DGU
The main functions and responsibilities of the DGU are:

e To investigate and prosecute members of gangs involved in gang related offences
divisionally, with the aim of disrupting the gang and their activities.

e To collect and collate all data on individuals, groups and activities engaged in gang
related activities through the use of the CAR form and other methods.

e Adhere to criminal gang information processes identified

¢ Creation and updating of criminal gang files within the Division

e Structure and organise procedures that provide the security of criminal gang files

¢ To establish partnership with external stakeholders as community groups, local
businesses with the objective to gather intelligence; and

* Any other responsibility that achieves the core mandate of the DGU or any function/
responsibility/ special assignment authorized by the Commissioner of Police.

Main Functions and Responsibilities of the DGR

e Perform data entry tasks of all information and intelligence collected by the DGU

e Analysis of collected and collated data on individuals, and groups engaged in gang-
related activities.

e Dissemination of intelligence obtained in the course of investigations to the Central
Intelligence Bureau (CIB), to assist in investigations, with the aim of successful
prosecution.

e Dissemination of information/ intelligence to CAPA to assist with Divisional
COMPSTAT in preparation of Operational Crime Plans.

e Creation of a Priority Offender Listing to be submitted to all Divisional Commanders.

e Any other responsibility to achieve the core mandate of the DGR or any function/
responsibility/ special assignment authorized by the Commissioner of Police.

Division Gang Unit (DGU)

1. The DGU shall be the initial recipient of all CARs. The DGU shall also be
the primary operational point of contact for all operational needs.
it, The DGU is responsible for collecting, evaluating, collating, analyzing,
maintaining, and disseminating criminal gang and crime analysis data on any
individual, group, or organization that is engaged in, or is suspected of being
engaged in conduct defined as a criminal act,
AS


--- page break ---

141/5
iii. The First Division Officer in charge of the respective DGU, in
consultation with the First Division Officer in charge of the SIU, shall
prescribe the procedures to be followed for the collection, dissemination,
and retention of criminal Gang information and for maintaining liaison
agencies for the exchange of criminal Gang.
iv. Criminal Gang files shall only be held, reviewed and stored at the office
of the DGU.
Vv. DGU personnel are authorized, with approval from the First Division
Officer in charge of the respective DGU, to prepare written Gang
summaries, assessments, and other necessary Gang work products.
Vi. The members of the DGU SHALL not copy, transmit or disseminate
information regarding gang intelligence without the prior approval of the
SDO I/C DGU and the First Division Officer in charge of the respective
DGU
DATA CAPTURING:
All intelligence shall be captured on the CAR forms and submitted to divisional CAPA analysts
for inputting data and performing analyses. These forms can be submitted based on the following
data sets, but not limited to:
e Profiling of prisoners when arrested
e Human Informants
e Social Media
e Street Interviews
CRIMINAL ACTIVITY REPORT (CAR)
A. CARs may be submitted by members of the DGU and only the approved Criminal
Activity Report form shall be used.
B. Completing the Criminal Activity Report:

1. If possible, include the subject's full name, address, alias, race, sex, date of birth,
identification document number, employment, associations and telephone
contact.

2. The information submitted must define a suspected or known criminal
activity.

C. Each CAR submitted shall be reviewed by the SDO I/C DGU to ensure the gang
activity and report content meet established criteria, which allows:

a. The information connects the individual, group, business, or organization
named with known or suspected criminal activity and the information is
relevant to that activity, and

fb


--- page break ---

141/6

b. The CAR contains no information referring to the political, religious, or social
views, association or activities of any individual, group, business, or
organization unless that information directly relates to an investigation of
past or threatened criminal acts and there are reasonable grounds to suspect
that any individual, group, business, or organization is or may be involved
in criminal activity.

c. Only CARs receiving final DGU approval shall be maintained by the DGR. If
the report does not meet established standards, the SDO I/C DGU shall
determine the disposition of the report.

d. CARs shall not be copied, replicated or disseminated except as required by a
DGR analyst, who receives prior approval from the SDOI/C DGU.

e. Sharing of relative or sensitive information:

a) Information shall only be shared for operational and tactical planning and
should be shared directly with a supervisor in the specific DGU who may
further transmit on a Need-to-know basis.

b) Whenever information is of an urgent nature it shall be forwarded verbally
to the appropriate supervisor, as soon as practical, upon receipt. Thereafter,
a CAR must be completed.

WRITTEN GANG BULLETINS AND REPORTS:

Periodically, the First Division Officer in charge of the respective DGU or any

other First Division Officer authorized by him shall disseminate written Gang

alerts, advisories or bulletins within the division and to other divisions or

agency officials, acting in an official capacity and having a valid Right to

Know and Need to Know.

i. Written Gang bulletins may contain raw, unevaluated Gang
information concerning time-sensitive criminal activity, or officer
safety considerations.

ii. The DGU shall review material for alerts, advisories and bulletins
considering source type, reliability and credibility of informational
content, The DGU _ shall obtain expressed permission to
disseminate.

iii. Written alerts, advisories or bulletins shall be sent through the most
secure methods available, as they contain confidential information
and at a minimum shall relate to one of three issues:

a. Ongoing criminal investigations

b. Identification of crime trends or problems, or

c. Provision of officer safety considerations

fT


--- page break ---

141/7
DATA STORING:
ALL information/ intelligence gathered is classified as confidential and must be stored both
physically in a secured filing cabinet at the main office of each DGU and electronically; this
information/ intelligence shall be password protected.
Personnel security checks and periodic review of security clearances of those personnel with
direct access to raw criminal Gang information shall be reviewed at the direction of the First
Division Officer in charge of the DGU who shall ensure that periodic inspections and audits are
conducted to ensure compliance with standard operating procedures
Criminal Gang information containing real, actual data shall not be sent to anyone via DGU
official email unless the message includes a confidentiality notice so designed by the TTPS IT
Department:
The TTPS IT Department shall advise and implement an appropriate system for the management
of data, for which control should reside with the Administrative Sergeants of the DGU.
DATA SHARING:
The D.G.R. shall be responsible for collecting and securing confidential information/ intelligence.
Any misuse or prohibited dissemination WILL result in disciplinary action and criminal
prosecution.
The First Division Officer in charge (or any other First Division Officer designated by him) of the
Special Investigations Unit shall have oversight and supervisory jurisdiction, including the
authority to request information regarding investigations of gangs and persons involved in serious
and organized crimes conducted by the DGU/DGR. to increase the possibility of successful
investigations and prosecutions.
The DGU shall produce bulletins, alerts and advisories when the need arises and disseminate with
the appropriate approval.
The DGU shall not limit the dissemination of information/intelligence to internal stakeholders,
ONLY, when necessary, as to avoid imminent danger to life and property.
DISSEMINATION OF GANG INFORMATION:
i. All requests for criminal gang information shall be directed to the
First Division Officer in charge of the DGU. Compilation and
dissemination shall be done by members of the DGU. Requests must
be specific as to what is needed and about whom. This applies to requests
initiated both by Division personnel and requests initiated by other external
agencies.
ii. The requestor shall provide the DGU with a detailed reason for the request
.A8


--- page break ---

141/8

iii. Criminal Gang Information shall be disseminated only to authorized persons
on a Need to Know and Right to Know basis, and then only if the
information is for use in the performance of a related law enforcement
activity within the scope of their duties and there is assurance that the
confidentiality of the information shall be maintained.

iv. This section shall not limit dissemination of a criminal gang information
assessment to an individual when necessary to avoid imminent danger to
life or property.

v. The DGU shall maintain a record of all dissemination of original CARs.

Vi. All disseminated reports containing criminal gang Information shall
contain a restrictive statement.

vii. | DGU personnel receiving criminal gang information shall be responsible for
properly safeguarding the information. Misuse or prohibited
dissemination may result in disciplinary action and criminal prosecution.

Tipping Off — Act 4 of 2021
14. (1) A person who—
(a) knows or suspects that a police officer or any other officer of a law enforcement authority is
acting, or is proposing to act, in connection with an investigation which is being, or is about to be,
conducted into an offence under this Act; and
(b) discloses to any other person information or any other matter which is likely to prejudice that
investigation, or proposed investigation, commits an offence and is liable on conviction on
indictment to a fine of ene hundred thousand dollars and to imprisonment for twenty years.
ADMINISTRATIVE STRUCTURE:
The Senior Superintendent of each division has overall responsibility of the DGU and the DGR
and shall report to the Commissioner of Police or through an officer authorized by him/a
designated person. The function of the administrative and operational management of the DGU
and DGR lies with a First Division Officer designated by the Senior Superintendent of each
division.
Structure:
The DGU shall comprise of such numbers of Sergeants, Corporals, Constables and Analysts as
determined by the Senior Superintendent based on the Division’s risk profile.

Ad


--- page break ---

141/9
UNIFORM
Operational wear- Battle dress Uniform
Patrol Orders Ceremonial and other uniformed events
OFFICES
The main office of the DGU in each respective Division shall be at a station so designed by
the First Division Officer in charge of the Division or any other First Division Officer so
designated.
RECRUITMENT AND SELECTION:
All personnel who are desirous of being considered into a DGU shall submit a written application
to the Senior Superintendent of Police in charge of their respective Division. All personnel are
required to undergo the following:
e Security Vetting/ Background Check(Conducted by the SIU)
¢ Polygraph Test
© Interviews
TRAINING
A First Division Officer designated by the Senior Superintendent of the Divisions shall
review and provide support to DGU training needs. Training consideration shall fall under
the following areas:
1. Gang investigations
2. Profiling
3. Source handling
4. Intelligence gathering and Analysis
5. Officer safety (specific tradecraft, firearm training)
6. Customer service
7. Surveillance Techniques
REMUNERATION
Given the dynamic, high risk and sensitivity of the duties at the DGU, officers so assigned
will be approved for the following allowances:
¢ Commuted Allowance
e Plain Clothes Allowance
Commissioner of Police
... /10


--- page break ---

141/10
SCHEDULE 1
PRIORITY REOFFENDERS LIST OF SERIOUS CRIMES
SCHEDULE A_ Violent Crimes
e Murders e Wounding and Shooting
e Sexual Offences e Robbery with Violence
e Kidnapping
e
SCHEDULE B Other Serious Crimes
e Drug Trafficking e Other Firearm related offences
e Other Serious Crimes with a term of
imprisonment of 10 years or more
SCHEDULE C__ White Collar Crimes 10+ Years term of imprisonment
¢ Reports in the Public interest e Money Laundering
e Fraud Offences e Financing of Terrorist groups
e Reports against Politically exposed © Other White-collar crimes with a term
persons of imprisonment of 10 years or more
e
SCHEDULE D__ Other Crimes of a Serious nature 7+ Years term of imprisonment
¢ Other Serious Crimes with a term of e¢ Other White-Collar Crimes with a term
imprisonment of 7 years or more of imprisonment of 7 years or more
./11


--- page break ---

141/11
SCHEDULE 2
TTPS RUBRIC FOR RE-OFFENDERS
Ranking of Priority Offenders
A profile conducted by the First Division Officer in charge of the respective DGU or any
designated officer of the rank of Sergeant or above, identifies the individual as a major
contributor to targeted crime(s) in the Division. The profiling exercise should specifically
document how one or more of the criteria below has been met and rank individuals
accordingly:
In the past 5 years — scores are weighted x 1 2-3 | >3
In the past 3 years — scores are weighted x 1.2 times | times
In the past year — scores are weighted x 1.5
1. | Charged for a Violent Crime is [8s fio |
Charged for a Serious Crime in Schedule 2 above 3 [6 [9 |
Charged for a White-Collar Crime in Schedule 2 above 3 [6 [9 |
4. | Charged for a Serious or White-Collar Crime in Schedule 3 , 4
above
Arrested for a Schedule 1 or 2 Crime
Intelligence identifies the individual as involved in gang related 7
crime and criminal activities
7. | Intelligence identifies the individual as a key suspect in violent 7
crimes
Intelligence identifies the individual as a key suspect in a
planned large scale immediate threat to the nation
Priority Offender List

¢ The full list of priority offenders should comprise persons who qualify based on the
above criteria and a score of 5 or more.

¢ The final monthly list should contain the top 10 offenders for that month by score
assigned, where volume, severity of crime and recency of offences are taken into
consideration.

e Where there is a reasonable expectation of a solid and prosecutable case being built
against the person identified in relation to an additional Schedule A or B Crime and
already qualified for the list, this may be used to assign a maximum of 2 additional
points to that individual.

e The list is dynamic and is updated monthly based on the most current information
available on offenders, crimes of interest and evidence available or which can be
acquired.

. AL2


--- page break ---

141/12
SCHEDULE 3
Template for data capture
Division: a
Priority Offender List - [Month, Year
Name of  Priority|Criteria used to target/Points |Age Date
Offender this person assigned identified as a
Priority
Offender
Es Re sO
Es
ep LLL
COO
Persons removed — [Month, Year]
Name of Priority | Date Date Date Other remarks
Offender identified as a |arrested j|charged (|(eg. any other
Priority reason for
Offender removal)
Fe ee ae a ST
Es es ee
™ O_O
Commissioner ice
