es os
pe Police Orders by
EK Commissioner of Police
Ver Police Administration Building
QSL Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
_ .
Rover pon so Port of Spain
Monday 22" August, 2022.
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian employees of
the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
No. 145 Departmental Order PARTS I & WI-NIL
PART IJ

This Departmental Order No. 145/2022 rescinds Departmental Order No. 59/2020 Re:

Establishment of the Air Support Unit (A.S.U.) in the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and any

other Directive/Order /Instruction regarding the administration and operation of the

aforementioned unit with immediate effect.

ESTABLISHMENT OF THE COASTAL AND AIR SUPPORT UNIT

1. Establishment:

The Commissioner of Police has taken a strategic decision to establish the Coastal &
Air Support Unit (CASU), with effect from 024 August 2022, in keeping with the
new organizational structure of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service (TTPS).
CASU is classified as a Class One (1) Specialist Support Unit and falls under the
purview of the Deputy Commissioner of Police, Operations and the Assistant
Commissioner of Police Tactical Support. The establishment of the CASU coincides
with the Operating Plan 2022 to effectuate key strategic objectives under Community
Partnership, Public Safety and Information and Communication Technology.

2. Definitions:

1. Aerodrome means any area of land or water designed, equipped, set apart or
commonly used for affording facilities for the landing and departure of aircraft and
includes any area or space, whether on the ground, on the roof of a building or
elsewhere, which is designed, equipped or set apart for affording facilities for the
landing and departure of aircraft capable of descending or climbing vertically, and
also includes an airport which has the meaning given to it under the Airports
Authority Act;!

2. Aircraft- An aeroplane, helicopter or other machine capable of flight.

3. Aviation Unit Manager (AUM)- A Police Officer appointed by the Commissioner
of Police with the responsibility of aerial asset management and operations and who
has the requisite training and experience.

4. Civil Aviation Authority also referred to as the Trinidad and Tobago Civil Aviation
Authority is the authority which provides oversight and regulates aviation in Trinidad
and Tobago, including aircrafts, airports and pilots established under Section 4 of the
Civil Aviation Act Chapter 49:03.

2


--- page break ---

145/2

5. Good standing-Intrinsic to the sensitivity of the Unit, an officer is deemed to be in
good standing once:

I. There is no evidence of ABUSE of Sick Leave for the previous two years.

II. Evidence of having performed actual service to the organization for the previous

three years.

6. Pilot in command in relation to an aircraft, means a person who for the time being is
in charge of the piloting of the aircraft without being under the direction of any other
pilot in the aircraft; ?

7. Remote Pilot- A person authorized according to Trinidad and Tobago Civil Aviation
Authority requirements to act as a remote pilot in command of any particular
unmanned aerial vehicle.

8. Tactical Flight Officers — (Subject to any future aircraft acquisition or use) Refers to
persons authorized according to Trinidad and Tobago Civil Aviation Authority
requirements to act as crew member and equipment operator of any aircraft.

9. Tactical Systems Operator- Refers to persons authorized according to Trinidad and
Tobago Civil Aviation Authority requirements to operate nonflying equipment of any
UA and authorized by the AUM based on Standard Operating Procedures.

10. Unmanned Aircraft (UA) -refers to an aircraft (or drone) without an on-board human
pilot.

11. Unmanned Aircraft System (UAS)-refers to the actual aircraft together with its
associated components such as a ground control station and the communication data
link.

12. Archipelagic State means the political entity of Trinidad and Tobago comprising that
group of islands including parts of islands inter-connecting waters and other natural
features which are so closely interrelated that they form an intrinsic geographical and
economic entity.

13. Archipelagic waters mean the waters enclosed by the archipelagic baselines as drawn
in accordance with section 6 of the Archipelagic Waters and Exclusive Economic
Zone Act.*

14. Authorized vessel: Those official State vessels, including warships, marine police
vessels and other specifically identified State vessels on non-commercial service,
which are authorized to engage in maritime law enforcement operations on behalf of
their State.

15. Boarding: an operation in which a law enforcement team boards a ship at sea, either
in national or international waters. Boarding must be performed in compliance with
the relevant authorization and in accordance with applicable domestic and
international laws identifying the jurisdictional basis upon which the operation is
based. Boarding must also take into account safety and security considerations, as
well as its authorized purpose and jurisdictional basis.

../3


--- page break ---

145/3

16. Contiguous Zone- means that area contiguous to the territorial sea which does not
extend beyond twenty-four nautical miles from the archipelagic baselines from which
the breadth of the territorial sea is measured.°

17. Continental Shelf- Means the seabed and subsoil of the submarine areas of Trinidad
and Tobago that extend beyond its territorial sea throughout the natural prolongation
of its land territory to its outer edge of its Continental Margin or to a distance of two
hundred nautical miles from the baselines from which the breadth of the territorial
sea of Trinidad and Tobago is measured where the outer edge of the Continental
Margin does not extend up to that distance.°

18. Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ)- The exclusive economic zone of Trinidad and
Tobago [Hereinafter referred to as the Exclusive Economic Zone] comprises all areas
of sea, having as their innermost limits the outermost limits of the territorial sea, and
as their outermost limits a line drawn seaward from the baseline from which the
territorial sea is measured. Every point of which is at a distance of two hundred
nautical miles from the nearest point of the baselines from which the breadth of the
territorial sea is measured.’

19. High Seas- Refers to the ocean surface and the water column beyond the Exclusive
Economic Zone (EEZ)

20. Innocent Passage- A ship or aircraft's right to enter and pass through another's
territory so long as it is not prejudicial to the peace, good order, or security of the
other state.

21. (1) Internal Waters- The internal waters of Trinidad and Tobago shall include any
areas of sea within its archipelagic waters that are on the landward side of the closing
lines
(2) In this section “closing lines” means the straight lines drawn in accordance with
the provisions of the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, that—
(a) cross the mouth of a river;

(b) enclose a bay;
(c) delimit the waters of a harbour.®

22. Nautical mile means 1852 metres.

23. Pilotage is the term used to describe the navigation and safe conduct of ships into and
out of harbours. This is achieved through the activities of licenced mariners known
as pilots. Pilotage also involves the provision of transport and transfer of licenced
marine pilots to and from vessels for which pilotage services are required.

24. Territorial Sea - The territorial sea of Trinidad and Tobago comprises those areas of
the sea having as their inner limits the base-lines defined in section 5 as their outer
limits, a line measured seaward from that baseline, every point of which is distant
twelve nautical miles from the nearest point of the baseline so, however, that where
the outer limits of the territorial sea of Trinidad and Tobago intersect foreign
territorial waters the outer limits thereof shall be resolved through agreements or
other means recognized by international law.’

./4


--- page break ---

145/4

25. T.T.P.S vessel- Refers to every description of a watercraft ordinarily used by
members of the Police Service, in which the hull is painted in white and on both sides
of such vessel in the midship region bears the markings/ logo/emblems of the T.T.P.S
and carries an identification number so specified.

26. Watercraft- Refers to water vessels or waterborne vessels, and are vehicles used in
and on water, including boats, ships, hovercraft, and submarines. Watercraft usually
have a propulsive capability (whether by sail, oar, paddle, or engine) and hence are
distinct from a simple device that merely floats, such as a log raft.

3. Introduction:

The Air Support Unit was established in 2020 by Departmental Order 59 dated 28th
February 2020, based on the TTPS transformation and partnerships to increase public
trust and confidence and incorporate new technologies. It was first operationalized
as a pilot project in

2011 to utilize new technology such as thermal cameras, spotlights and loudspeakers
made available under the previous Specialized Anti-Crime Unit of Trinidad and
Tobago (SAUTT). Trained aviators from SAUTT formed a dedicated team in TTPS
to utilize the aerial assets and partner with external stakeholders. Today, the Air
Support Unit (ASU) boasts of the ability to manage and control fixed wing aircraft
and several Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS), including Quadcopter Aerial
Systems.

The formation of the Riverine and Coastal Unit was a project initiated in 2020 by the
Office of the Commissioner. The Unit was intended to effectively manage the
coastline and rivers of Trinidad & Tobago, where intelligence suggested that the
territorial waters of Trinidad were bombarded with narcotics and firearms trafficking,
illegal immigrant entries and other transnational crimes.

The escalating levels of crime and increased sophistication of criminal activity
require radical changes to the approach in the fight against crime. The traditional
methods of treating with crime are severely challenged to meet the needs.
Consequently, a strategic decision was taken to merge the Air and Coastal Units to
optimize resource utilization.

4. Mandate:

The merger of Air Support and the Coastal Units formally establishes the maritime
& aviation law enforcement arm of the TTPS. CASU is mandated to carry out dual
roles. The CASU will be primarily tasked with detection and prosecution of crimes
perpetrated by criminal entities on and around the maritime borders of Trinidad &
Tobago. Additionally, CASU will provide aerial support to internal and external law
enforcement agencies and assist with protection and service to the people of Trinidad
and Tobago through response and recovery. The main target groups are persons
involved in the use of illegal drug and firearms trafficking, human trafficking,
smuggling of migrants, piracy, armed robberies, counterfeit goods, wildlife poaching
and trafficking. The Unit is also mandated to assist the Caribbean and/or Regional
and International Entities where needed and subject to the Unit’s resources.
../5


--- page break ---

145/5

5. Role & Function of CASU:

1. Focus efforts on crimes of transnational significance within the borders of Trinidad
& Tobago

2. Aid internal and external stakeholders with search and rescue operations.

3. Counter drone and aircraft surveillance.

4. Provide operational support to Domestic, Regional and International law
enforcement agencies both of a Governmental and Non-Governmental nature.

5. Execute concerted high impact, strategic operations against criminal enterprises on
the seas.

6. Respond and or assist with reports emanating from the Radar Centre of the Coast
Guard of Trinidad and Tobago.

7. Monitor manned and unmanned aircraft operations with the potential of illegal and
unauthorized acts.

8. Handle logistics for Airborne Law Enforcement operations and record details of all
such operations.

9. Operate and assist with intelligence gathering for internal and external stakeholders.

10. Subject to the acquisition of additional resources, patrol the national airspace and
maritime boundaries within and above the territories of Trinidad and Tobago.

11. Provide key aviation specialized support to the Divisions, Branches, Sections and
Units of the TTPS, other external law enforcement agencies and external territories
subject to any international agreements.

12. Provide operational support throughout the TTPS and or other domestic, regional and
international agencies or which is incidental thereto.

6. Internal and external stakeholders and partners of the ACSU include but are
not limited to:

A.C.1.B
COUNTER TRAFFICKING UNIT
CYBER AND SOCIAL MEDIA UNIT
L.A.T.F (N.O.T.F)
S.LU
SPECIAL BRANCH
AIRPORT AUTHORITY OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
CUSTOMS & EXCISE DIVISION
./6


--- page break ---

145/6

CHAGUARAMAS DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY

IMMIGRATION DIVISION

ISLAND PROPERTY OWNERS’ ASSOCIATION

PRISON SERVICE OF THE TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO

TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO AIR GUARD

TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO COAST GUARD

TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO REIMENT

TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO CIVIL AVIATION

MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE- FORESTRY DIVISION GAME WARDENS

NATIONAL HELICOPTER SERVICES

NORTH POST RADIO

7. Administrative Structure:
ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER OF POLICE TACTICAL SUPPORT
ASSISTANT SUPERINTENDENT CASU
INSPECTOR “AIR Support Unit” INSPECTOR “COASTAL Support Unit
8. Operational Division of the CASU:

The CASU will be divided operationally into two units. The Air Support Unit which

is responsible for Aviation operations and the Coastal Support Unit which is

responsible for the Coastal/Maritime operations.

8.1 Assignment:

Officers to be attached to the CASU will be transferred to the CASU and posted to

the respective Support Unit as identified above

The Sanctioned Strength of the CASU are as follows

ee ed ed
Air Support Unit Strength ers OF
Coastal Support Unit Strength || 1 | 1 | 4 [a7 | 25
TOTALSANCTIONED STRENGTH | 1 | 2 | 2 | 6 | 24 | 35
ST


--- page break ---

145/7
The strength of the CASU shall be augmented by members of the Special Reserve
Police as needed.

9. Offices and Contact Information:

The Office of CASU shall be situated at locations specific to the dual role of the
Unit.

1. The Air Support Office will primarily be located at Piarco Police Station, Golden
Grove Road. Piarco with operational and deployment offices at Cumuto Airbase,
other designated aerodromes indicated from time to time. Telephone contact: 669-
5020, 689-0813, 708-1669, 708-1674, Cisco- 63012 and 63013.

2. The Coastal Support Office will be located at the Trinidad & Tobago Coast Guard
Training Compound, Heliport Base, Western Main Road, Chaguaramas. Telephone
Contact: 773-9664.

10. Current Maritime Patrol Zone:

Subject to the acquisition of new police vessels, the ACU shall patrol up to two (2)
nautical miles of the maritime borders of Trinidad & Tobago.

11. Coastal Boundaries:

See Schedule 1 and 2.

12. Authority to operate Police Vessels:

Officers attached to the Coastal Support Unit of the CASU shall be required to
undergo training which leads to specific certification and licencing by approved
organizations as designated by the Commissioner of Police. Upon completion the
names of these officers shall be published in a Departmental Order allowing
permission to operate a Police Vessel of the nature so indicated.

13. Authority to operate Manned and Unmanned Aircraft:

Officers attached to the Air Support Unit of the CASU shall be required to undergo
training which leads to specific certification and licencing by approved organizations
as designated by the Commissioner of Police. Upon completion the names of these
officers shall be published in a Departmental Order allowing permission to operate
Manned or Unmanned Aircraft of the nature so indicated.

.../8


--- page break ---

145/8

14, Qualifications:

CASU personnel will consist of Police Officers with special skills, specialist training
and experience in specific functions.

14.1 Air Support Unit:

The Air Support Unit will be headed by a Police officer also referred to as an
Aviation Unit Manager (AUM). The duties of the AUM are as follows (The
omission of specific statements of the duties does not exclude them from the
classification if the work is similar, related, or_a logical assignment for this
classification):

A. Responsible for managing and maintaining aerial assets.

1. Supervises, directs, and evaluates assigned staff, addresses employee concerns and
problems; completes employee performance appraisals.

2. Assists with recommending suitable candidates to perform duties at the Air Support
Unit inclusive of pilots, tactical flight officers, tactical system operators and other
support staff.

3. Acts as a liaison between the TTPS and other aerial platform providers and
stakeholders.

4. Monitors radio transmissions to ensure all calls are answered and responds to scene
of subordinates’ calls to answer questions.

B. The AUM shall be suitably qualified with the undermentioned qualification and
experience, and will be appointed subject to the approval of the Commissioner:

1. At least ten years’ service as a member of the TTPS, and in good standing. Four of
which must be in a supervisory capacity.

2. Must possess an Airline, Private or Commercial Pilot Licence issued by the Civil
Aviation Authority of Trinidad & Tobago.

3. Possession of a Remote Pilot Licence issued by the Civil Aviation Authority of
Trinidad and Tobago is considered an asset.

4. Drone management and operations training.

5. May be required to attain and maintain additional certifications specific to assigned
unit.

C. All other officers shall have a combination of the undermentioned experience and
qualification:

1. Atleast three years’ service as a member of the TTPS and or a member of the Special
Reserve Police.

2. Airline, Commercial or Private Pilot Licence issued by the Civil Aviation Authority
of Trinidad and Tobago

3. Drone management and training will be considered an asset

4. Be physically fit and could do daily intense physical tasks.

5. May be required to attain and maintain additional certifications specific to assigned
unit.

./9


--- page break ---

145/9
14.2 Coastal Support Unit:
The Unit will consist of Police Officers with special skills, specialist training and
experience in specific functions and shall have a combination of the undermentioned
experience and qualification:

1. Atleast three years’ service as a member of the TTPS and or a member of the
Special Reserve Police

2. Boat Master III Licences/ Launch Captain Licence issued by the relevant authority

3. STCW training and or certification will be considered an asset

4. Be physically fit and could do daily intense physical tasks

5. Class 2 and 3 Driver’s Licence

6. Boating training or experience

7. Basic swimming

15. Recruitment:

A. Officers desirous of joining the CASU must apply in writing to the First Division
Officer in charge of the CASU indicating the respective Unit of interest.

1. Officers must be of good character and good standing within the TTPS, evidenced
by a Recommendation from the Head of the Division/ Section/ Branch/ Unit the
officer was last attached.

2. Officers must possess the recommended qualifications for either unit of the CASU.

3. Intrinsic to the nature of work the Officer must be physically fit, and has the ability
to lift heavy objects, and carry out strenuous exercises.

4. Intrinsic to the nature of the work, must be in good standing with the TTPS.

B. Officers must undergo the following:

1. Intense physical assessments (which includes but is not limited to basic swimming
for officers attached to the Coastal Support Unit.)

2. Initial Polygraph (and be subject to continuous and random polygraph testing)

3. Interviews

4. Drug testing (and be subject to continuous and random polygraph testing)

5. Psychometric evaluation

6. Officers must undergo security vetting.

16. Training:

16.1 Induction Training:
Upon selection, officers will be required to successfully undergo a period of
INTENSE physical and classroom training for the respective support units of the
CASU.

.../10


--- page break ---

145/10

16.2 Continuous Training:
The First Division Officer in charge of the Unit or an Officer so designated, shall be
responsible for reviewing and making provisions to provide periodic training to
support the CASU training needs. These shall include but are not limited to:

1. Officer safety

2. Intense Physical Training

3. Surveillance Techniques

4. Customer Service Training

5. Swimming

6. Search & Rescue Operations

7. Drone Management

8. UA Night Operations

9. Boat orientation including boarding, boarding risk assessments, boat drills,
searching, emergency drills etc.

10. First Aid

11. Basic survival

12. Navigation

13. Sensitization to Meteorology

14. Human Factors Safety

15. Radio telephony

16. Manned aircraft operations

17. Underwater egress training

18. Sensitization to areas of International Law and local laws (inclusive of amendments)
that may be utilized by the Unit.

17. Remuneration Package:
Given the dynamic, highly sensitive and high-risk environment in which Officers at
the CASU will be required to function under, subject to approval by the
Commissioner of Police, Officers will receive the following allowances:

1. Commuted Overtime Allowance

2. Plain Clothes Allowance

3. Proficiency Allowance evidenced by a particular specialized skill

./11


--- page break ---

145/11

18. Uniforms:
Officers attached to CASU will primarily wear the following:
18.1 Coastal Support Unit:

DESCRIPTION DUTY

Blue Battle Dress Uniform made of a self- | During coastal patrol operations

dry material

Blue Battle dress uniform with black | Ground Overt Operations

baseball cap with the words POLICE on the

front.

Black military or operational boots

Plain Clothes

Regulation patrol orders Ceremonial and other Uniformed events
18.2 Air Support Unit:

DESCRIPTION DUTY

Black fire-retardant flight suits During manned aircraft flights

Blue Battle dress uniform with black baseball | Ground overt operations

cap with the words POLICE on the front.

Black military or operational boots

Plain Clothes

Regulation patrol orders Ceremonial and other Uniformed events

Civil pilot uniform- White pilot shirt, black | Special meetings, events or civil duties as

pants and black shoes with associated wings | sanctioned by the Commissioner of Police

and badges.

1. On the upper right arm of the Battle Dress Uniform the emblems of the Trinidad and
Tobago Police Service engraved on a blue TTPS patch with the letters CASU.

2. Immediately below the TTPS patch the logo of the respective Support Unit of the
CASU should be worn.

3. On the front, right side of the uniform, the name or emblem of the respective support
unit of the CASU subject to the gear being worn.

4. On the front left side of the uniform the word ‘POLICE’ is to be worn.

5. Black military or operational type boots and or any suitable footwear so approved by
the Commissioner of Police from time to time.

6. The members of each support unit will wear plain clothes from time to time but
subject to approval of the Head of the Unit.

7. Officers will wear the safety gear and or equipment necessary for the daily tasks of
the respective support units.

12


--- page break ---

145/12

Air Support Unit members only-
On the front, left side of the uniform, above the word POLICE, the emblem of the
double aviator wings (for registered pilots only) or single left wing (for ground crew
and support staff).

19. The First Division Officer in charge of CASU shall ensure the design and
implementation of a safe system of work which must be complied with.
The legal boundaries of the oceans and airspace of Trinidad and Tobago are indicated
at Schedule 1 and 2.
The footnotes are indicated at Schedule 3.

Qe
Ommissioner of Police


--- page break ---

Schedule 1
Legal
National International Boundaries of
————>|<—_-______‘"" ——_______»
Airspace Airspace the Oceans and
— Airspace
ares 122m —p | e— 122m —>
Land Territorial Contiguous High
Zone
P \ <— Exclusive Economic Zone
A
>
I 200 nm
L
i
N
: —_——— Continental Shelf ™~
The Area
nn - nautical mile


--- page break ---

Schedule 2
ee
Tria isd seted Tir-bicey =
4rche pebey “gar
Seer er bike Sl
a ee
= Base At ee
—_—— Sere er
1 ae
fs bee ee a —
> a ae ae or Fas
re oe
Caribloewar oa ae — t
_— :
ss ae é
a
a — a E *
ee Tie =r ‘ i
ae es
= eres ae i = ——, -
cc os é 1 f
Fa . :
ba  TRININAR |
oe 7 a
= ee .,
_ Lf apes ie
—_ Pg 5 —_ a fc
, ae a
aS
Sie
WENHEZFUELA ae ee
te “Se, .
Sn os
Schedule 3
'Civil Aviation Act Chapter 49:03
Civil Aviation Act Chapter 49:03
*Archipelagic Waters and Exclusive Economic Zone Act Chapter 51:06
“Archipelagic Waters and Exclusive Economic Zone Act Chapter 51:06
Territorial Sea Act Chapter 1:51]
°Continental Shelf Act
7Archipelagic Waters and Exclusive Economic Zone Act Chapter 51:06
*Territorial Sea Act Chapter 1:51
*Territorial Sea Act Chapter 1:51
