te) Police Orders by
; Commissioner of Police
7. yy 7 Police Administration Building
VS Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
Towoad ATR PUCE Sem Port of Spain
% d
Provecr an So Monday 22" August, 2022
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian employees of
the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
No. 148 Departmental Order PARTS I & UI-NIL
PART I
COASTAL & AIR SUPPORT UNIT (CASU) RECRUITMENT
The Commissioner of Police has taken a strategic decision to establish the Coastal & Air Support
Unit (CASU) within the Trinidad & Tobago Police Service. The CASU is subdivided into two
support units, namely the Air Support Unit and the Coastal Support Unit.
OBJECTIVE:
The main goal of the CASU is aligned with the TTPS STRATEGIC GOAL #1 and 2, which aids
with the reduction of threat of crime perpetrated by criminal entities involved in the use of
intimidating tactics, terrorism, extortion, corruption and related violence associated with, but not
limited to the use of firearms, improvised explosive devices and explosives, illegal drugs and drug
trafficking.
CORE COMPETENCIES:
Police Officers attached to the CASU must:
» Demonstrate the ability to be significantly committed and dedicated to the job.
» Adhere to the highest standards of conduct especially in maintaining honesty and
integrity.
» Maintain a high level of fitness necessary to complete the training and throughout the
period of the attachment.
» Must be in good standing with the organisation (Good standing means)
1. There is no evidence of ABUSE of Sick Leave for the previous two years.
2. Evidence of having performed actual service to the organisation for the previous three
years.
mle


--- page break ---

148/2
RECRUITMENT & SELECTION:
Officers desirous of joining the CASU must apply in writing to the First Division Officer in
charge of the CASU indicating the respective Unit of interest.

I. Officers must be of good character and good standing within the TTPS, evidenced by a
Recommendation from the Head of the Division/ Section/ Branch/ Unit the officer was last
attached.

2. Officers must possess the recommended qualifications for either Units of the CASU.

3. Intrinsic to the nature of work the Officer must be physically fit, have the ability to lift
heavy objects, and carry out strenuous exercises.

Officers must undergo the following:

» Amedical examination to be done by a Government Medical Officer or the Police Medical
Officer.

» Intense physical assessments

» Initial Polygraph (and be subject to continuous and random polygraph testing)

» Interviews

» Drug testing (and be subject to continuous and random polygraph testing)

» Psychometric evaluation

» Officers must undergo background checks and security vetting.

TRAINING:
Upon selection, officers will be required to successfully undergo a period of INTENSE physical
and classroom training for the respective support units of the CASU.
REQUIREMENTS:
Air Support Unit
1. At least three years’ service as a member of the TTPS and or a member of the
Special Reserve Police.
2. Airline, Commercial or Private Pilot Licence issued by the Civil Aviation Authority
of Trinidad and Tobago is considered an asset
3. Drone management and training is considered an asset
4. Be physically fit and have the ability to do daily intense physical tasks.
5. May be required to attain and maintain additional certifications specific to assigned
unit.
./3


--- page break ---

148/3
Coastal Support Unit

1. At least three years’ service as a member of the TTPS and or a member of the
Special Reserve Police,

2. Boat Master III Licences / Launch Captain Licence issued by the relevant authority
is considered an asset

3. STCW training and or certification is considered an asset

4. Be physically fit and have the ability to do daily intense physical tasks

5. Class 2 Driver’s Licence is considered an asset

6. Boating training or experience

7. Basic swimming certification

REMUNERATION PACKAGE:

Given the dynamic, highly sensitive and high risk environment in which Officers at the CASU will
be required to function under, subject to approval by the Commissioner of Police, Officers will
receive the following allowances:

a. Commuted Overtime Allowance

b. Plain Clothes Allowance

c. Proficiency Allowance evidenced by a particular specialised skill

ASSIGNMENT:

Officers attached to the CASU will be transferred to the CASU and posted to the respective support
units.

APPLICATION PROCESS:

1. Officers desirous of being considered shall apply in writing to the Assistant
Commissioner of Police Tactical Support, Guard & Emergency Branch
Headquarters, Garden Road Aranguez.

2. This application must be addressed as above, and hand delivered in a sealed 8 x 14
manila envelope to the Office of Assistant Superintendent of Police, Coastal and
Air Support Unit located at Guard & Emergency Branch Headquarters, Garden
Road Aranguez. The front of the envelope must indicate the respective unit of
CASU the officer is applying for.

3. The application must be accompanied by photocopies of supporting documents of
the officer’s qualifications. These photocopies must be certified by a police officer
of the rank of Sergeant and above as having seen the original of such documents.

./4


--- page break ---

148/4

4, The application must also be accompanied by two written recommendations, one
of which MUST derive from a current or previous police supervisor who can attest
to the applicant’s character and suitability.

5. The closing date for applications is 3:00pm on Monday 10" October 2022 LATE
applications will NOT be entertained.

6. Unsuitable applications will not be acknowledged.

ommissioner 0
