Police Orders by Mrs. Erla Christopher
Commissioner of Police
Police Administration Building
Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
Port of Spain
Peronecr ss Thursday 28" December, 2023
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian employees of
the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
No. 167 Departmental Order PART I & III - NIL
PART I
Departmental Order 93 of 2017 dated 11 August, 2017 is hereby repealed and replaced with the
following:
Use of Body Worn Cameras in the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service
I. INTRODUCTION
1. The Trinidad and Tobago Police Service (TTPS) recognizes the important role that the Body Worn
Camera is fulfilling in modern day policing. It has been used by many police agencies across the world
to demonstrate transparency to communities; to record statements; observation of behaviours and other
evidence; and to deter unprofessional, illegal and inappropriate behaviours by both law enforcement
officers and the public (Body-worn Camera Toolkit 2015). It is on this back drop that the TTPS has
undertaken to use Body Worn Cameras in the course of policing in Trinidad & Tobago.
Definitions
2. Body Worn Camera - refers to a small audio and video recording device that is worn by a police officer
and is used to record interaction between the police and community members (e.g. the public, suspects
and victims.)
Record Mode - The process that causes the Body Worn Camera system to record video and /or audio
data.
Recorded Media - Includes any audio-video signals recorded or digitally stored on a storage device or
portable media.
Intention
3. The Trinidad and Tobago Police Service intends to fulfil its fundamental duty to serve the community;
to safeguard lives and property; and to protect the constitutional rights of all to liberty, equality and
justice.
../2


--- page break ---

167/2
The TTPS has embarked on a drive to ensure that there is a measure of transparency in all our daily
activities and operations in an attempt to bring justice; peace and security for all. The assurance of a
high level of responsibility and professionalism is paramount in all activities of police officers,
particularly since police officers in their normal course of duties will encounter bystanders, suspects and
victims in a wide variety of sometimes stressful and extreme situations.
Historically, there was no video and audio evidence of most encounters between police officers and the
public. Due to the sometimes volatile nature of those encounters, this often resulted in radically
divergent accounts of incidents. Body worn cameras have the potential serve as a check against the
abuse of power by police officers and alternatively as protection for the police officer against false
accusations by members of the public.
The use of Body Worn Cameras by police officers on active duty would greatly assist in objective
incident reporting and the investigation of alleged acts of abuse and misconduct by law enforcement
officers.
Il. PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES
The purpose of this policy is to establish guidelines and limitations for the use and management of
Body Worn Camera systems by police officers whilst on active duty.
The TTPS shall use the Body Worn Camera system, to videotape and audio-record encounters and
interactions involving law enforcement activity. The use of Body Worn Camera systems will
accomplish several objectives such as:
a. Enhance officer safety.
b. Record statements and events.
c. Facilitate the ability to review statements and actions for documentation/reporting
purposes and for courtroom preparation/presentation.
d. Preserve visual and audio information for use in current and future investigations.
e. Provide an impartial method for self-critique and evaluation for training purposes.
f Enhance public trust by preserving factual representations of officer-citizen contacts
in the form of audio/visual recordings.
g. Provide additional evidence for court and administrative proceedings.
h. Assist decisions which are to be made by the Director of Public Prosecutions when
an officer's conduct is under scrutiny.
i. Assist the Professional Standards Bureau with internal investigations into complaints
against police officers.
j. Enhance the quality of police patrol.
a)


--- page break ---

167/3

The effective use of Body Worn Cameras is therefore expected to contribute directly to the following
strategic outcomes of the TTPS:

- Restore Public Trust and Confidence

— Reduce Violent Crime

— Improve Case Management
Ill. PROCEDURES
A. General Administration

1. The cameras shall be issued to the Second Division Officer (SDO) in charge of the
station or section.

2. The cameras shall be securely stored within the station compound or the designated
office within a specialist section only.

3. The SDO in charge shall be responsible for maintaining a camera register,
documenting the issue, return, and recorded media viewing history.

4, Prior to the deployment of each patrol, the senior officer and/ or the briefing officer
on duty shall inspect the Body Worn Camera equipment to ensure the system is
sufficiently charged and fully operational.

5. Officers shall not attempt to make repairs to the Body Worn Camera equipment
system.

6. Malfunctions, damage, loss, or theft of the Body Worn Camera equipment shall be
immediately reported to the shift supervisor. The supervisor shall be responsible to
forward this information within twenty-four (24) hours of receiving such report to the
IT help desk.

7. Training shall be conducted by the Police Academy on the use of Body Worn
Cameras at least once per year.

B. Usage

1. The Body Worn Camera equipment shall be operated in accordance with the
manufacturer's guidelines and the TTPS guidelines and policies.

2. The Body Worn Camera shall be worn by the assigned officers whilst on duty in
accordance with the guidelines outlined herein.

3. The Body Worn Camera shall be placed in "Record Mode" as soon as the officer is
dispatched on patrol. Once in "Record Mode", the Body Worn Camera system shall
remain ON until the end of the shift.

../4


--- page break ---

167/4

4, During the patrol shift the camera can be switched OFF only under prohibitions as
outlined in Section III-C below. If the camera is switched OFF as per provisions
mentioned in IJ-C, the officer wearing the camera shall inform the sub-control.

5. In public or private, while it is generally implied that words and/or actions performed
in the presence of a police officer have no expectation of privacy, when feasible and
safe under the circumstances to do so, officers shall verbally announce at the
beginning of every encounter with members of the public, that his Body Worm
Camera is recording the interaction.

6. In any incident, or investigation that results in an Incident Report, summons/warrants,
ticket or other TTPS document being generated and the Body Worn Camera system
was used, the officer shall note its' use on the appropriate document. For example, if
a ticket is issued, the officer shall make a notation on the back of the record copy of
the ticket, indicating that the incident was recorded.

7. Whenever an officer records an incident or any portion of an incident, which that
officer reasonably believes will likely lead to a citizen complaint, the officer shall
immediately bring it to the attention of his/her shift supervisor who shall ensure that
proper protocols are observed.

8. Officers shall not allow citizens or unauthorized persons to review the recordings
unless authorized by Commissioner of Police or his/her designee.

9. The recorded media shall only be viewed within the confines of the charge
roonyreception area with approval from an officer of the rank of inspector and above.
The details of the viewing must be recorded in the camera register.

10. The SDO in charge is strictly prohibited from sharing camera/recorded media login
information. Whenever the SDO is transferred, she/he must inform the IT help desk
and surrender the login information.

11. Officers shall NOT make copies of any recording for their personal use and are
prohibited from using a recording device (such as a camera phone or a secondary
video camera) to record body camera contents or recorded media.

12. TTPS may review samples of camera records/recorded media for research purposes,
in which no research report identifies individual officers in reference to any
performance issues.

13. Inorder to monitor the implementation of the Body Worn Camera policy and evaluate
its effectiveness, the TTPS will compile and analyze statistics including:

- monthly assignment of Body Worn Cameras by Division and Section

- daily assignment of Body Worn Cameras by shift

~ daily usage time per camera utilizing a unique identifier (e.g. serial number or camera
name)

- records of reports of camera malfunctions, damage or other reasons for camera
inactivity

- monthly statistics on incidents where Body Worn Cameras have been used to
supplement evidence for reported serious crimes

A/S


--- page break ---

167/5
— monthly statistics on incidents where Body Worn Cameras have been used to
supplement investigations of alleged police misconduct and other complaints against
police officers.
C. Prohibited Recordings
The Body Worn Camera shall NOT be used to capture:

1. Sensitive exposures of private body parts.

2. Events which occur in police dormitory or dressing rooms, restroom, or any other
place where there would be reasonable expectation of privacy.

3. To record conversations of fellow employees without their knowledge during routine,
non-law enforcement related activities.

4. Non-work related personal activities of a personal nature.

D. Data Download/ Media Storage

1. The Body Worn Camera shall be placed in charging mode at the end of each shift or
whenever charging is required.

2. Data shall only be downloaded to the servers established or authorized by TTPS IT
Department.

3. Downloaded data shall be maintained at TTPS for a minimum of one year. Data that
has evidentiary value in criminal cases and/or citizen complaints against officers shall
be retained in accordance with existing policy and procedures.

4. Requests for copies of any data from the TTPS shall be made to the Commissioner
of Police.

E. Review of Recorded Data

1. To prevent damage to or alteration of the original recorded media, it shall not be
copied, viewed or otherwise inserted into any device not approved by the
Commissioner of Police or his/her designee. When reasonably possible, a copy of the
original media shall be used for viewing (unless otherwise directed the Commissioner
of Police) to preserve the original media.

2. Recorded media may be viewed in any of the following situations:

i. For use when preparing reports or statements.
ii. To assess proper functioning of the cameras.
ili. By TTPS investigators who are participating in an official investigation such
as a personal complaint, administrative inquiry, or a criminal investigation.
..-/6


--- page break ---

167/6
iv. By TTPS personnel who request to review recordings where approval is
granted.
v. Recordings may be shown for training purposes, however if an officer objects
to the showing of the recording, his/her objection shall be submitted to the
Commissioner of Police who shall determine if the training value outweighs
the officer's objection.
F. Information Technology Responsibilities
The TTPS IT Department shall be responsible for:
1. Ordering and issuing all Body Worn Cameras;
2. Assigning all recording media with an identification number prior to issuance to the
field;
3. Retrieving, storing and duplicating all recorded media;
4. Collecting all completed recorded media for oversight and verification of wireless
downloaded/uploaded recorded media;
5. Ensuring recorded media is stored in a secure location with authorized controlled
access;
6. Making the appropriate entries and ensuring a proper chain of custody is maintained;
7. Production of recorded media to a court order;
8. Storage of recorded media in accordance with established records retention policies.
9. Supplying data on Body Worn Camera usage on a monthly basis;
10. Maintenance of Body Worn Cameras; and
11. Managing the long-term storage of recorded media that has been deemed to be of
evidential value in accordance with the prescribed evidence storage protocols and the
records retention schedule.
G. Recording Media Storage and Integrity
Once submitted for storage, all recorded media shall be labelled and stored in a designated secure
space. All recorded media that is not logged as evidence shall be retained for a minimum of one
year, after which it will be archived in accordance with the established records retention schedule.
Note: All recording media, recorded videos and audios are the property of the TTPS. Dissemination
outside of the police service is STRICTLY PROHIBITED, except to the extent permitted by this
order or required by law.
FAILURE TO COMPLY WILL RESULT IN DISCIPLINARY ACTION BEING TAKEN.
melophir Cof”
Mn of Police
