ts) Police Orders by
py Commissioner of Police
en Police Administration Building
: ~ ; Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
S {RIRIDAD &TOOAGO POLICE Senvace P Port of Spain
% oot
Srovect ANDS Tuesday 2! November 2022
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian employees of
the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
No. 182 | Departmental Order PART I & IUJ-NIL
PART II
Amendment to Departmental Order 14 of 2008
1. Information
The Commissioner of Police and his Executive have continued with the mandate identified by way of the
Trinidad and Tobago Police Service (TTPS) Strategic Plan 2022-2024 which aligns with the current National
Strategic Developmental Plan. The activities outlined seeks to facilitate a more efficient TTPS with an overall
aim of increased public safety end crime reduction.
The TTPS utilises a number of tools to execute these strategies with one such tool being our codified rules
and regulations that appear inter alia in Departmental Orders. However, in keeping abreast with current
changes it is necessary to review and update these Departmental Orders to ensure productivity and operational
excellence.
2. Intention
This Order is intended to amend Departmental Order No 14 dated 24"" January 2008 (Hereinafter referred to
as DO 14 of 2008) to align wita action item 1.1.4A of the TTPS Operating Plan 2022. It seeks to introduce
Peer Mediation as one of the remedial methods to deal with addressing minor issues/ complaints within the
Organisation.
3. Amendments
No 10 g of DO 14 of 2008 reads:
“Peruse the report submitted by an Investigating Officer and determine whether or not there is substance in
the allegation”
No 10g is amended to read:
“Peruse the report submitted by an Investigating Officer and determine whether or not there is substance in
the allegation. However, in the circumstances where minor issues are identified, this complaint can be dealt
with through peer mediation.”
Commissioner of Police
4\ i, | aa
