KS)
es Ry,
py Police Orders by
eur Commissioner of Police
WS _ Police Administration Building
Bac 05sce Pouce sone Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
= .
PRovecr sams Pant of Spain
Tuesday 8" November, 2022.
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian employees of
the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
No. 186 Departmental Order PART 1 & If - NIL
PART II
COLLECTION OF DNA SAMPLES IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE ADMINISTRATION OF
JUSTICE (DEOXYRIBONUCLEIC ACID) ACT CHAPTER 5:34
By correspondence dated October 14, 2022 the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of National Security informed the
Commissioner of Police of the pos:tion of the Minister of National Security on the non-compliance of members
of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service, Special Reserve Police and Supplemental Police, to the collection of
DNA Samples as mandated by law
Section 15 of the Administration of Justice (Deoxyribonucleic Acid) Act Chap 5:34 mandates certain State
employees to provide non-intimate samples (DNA samples). The relevant sections of the Act are reproduced
hereunder for the information of all Police Officers, inclusive of Special Reserve and Supplemental.
Sec 15 (1) “A non-intimate sample shall be taken from a person specified in the Third Schedule
without his consent”.
(2) “A person specified in the Fourth Schedule shall make arrangements for the taking of
a non-intimate by a qualified person, from a person specified in the Third Schedule.
THIRD SCHEDULE
A non-intimate sample shall be taken, without consent from the following persons in accordance with Section 15
(1) of the Administration of Justice (Deoxyribonucleic Acid) Act-
1. A person who is employed, or applies for employment as:
a) an officer of the Protective Services;
b) amember of the Muxicipal Service;
c) amember of the Special Reserve Police;
d) aconstable within the meaning of the Supplemental Police Act;
e) amember of the Defence Force;
f) acCustoms Officer oj the Customs and Excise Division
g) an Immigration Officer of the Immigration Divison; or
h) a private security officer.
2. A person who is employed or assigned duties at the Trinidad and Tobago Forensic Science Centre and
who is engaged in the collection or receipt of samples or the conduct of DNA analysis.
wien


--- page break ---

186/2

FOURTH SCHEDULE
A non-intimate sample shall be taken by a qualified person, from a person specified in the Third Schedule, on the
authority of the following persons in accordance with Section 15(2) of the Administration of Justice
(Deoxyribonucleic Acid) Act:

(a) the Commissioner of Police, in respect of the —

i. police service
ii. special reserve police; and
iii. | supplemental police

(b) the Chief Fire Officer, in respect of the Fire Service

(c) the Commissioner of Prisons, in respect of the Prison Service

(d) the Chief Officer, in respect of the Municipal Police Service

(e) the Chief of Defence Staff, in respect of Defence Force;

(f) the Comptroller of Customs, in respect of the Customs and Excise Division,

(g) the Chief Immigration Officer, in respect of the Immigration Division; and

(h) the employer, in respect of a private security officer.”
Accordingly, the Minister of National Security has informed that effective December 01, 2022 officers who
willfully do not comply with the requirements of the law, will not be considered for certain discretionary
opportunities, such as overseas training or attendance at overseas seminars and or conferences.
It should be noted that officers who choose not to comply with the law, may be bypassed for acting appointments
and promotion opportunities and may also be subjected to disciplinary action.
As law enforcers, non-intimate DNA samples must be collected from all police officers including officers from
the Special Reserve and Supplemental.
The Trinidad and Tobago Police Service is part of a Ministry of National Security ‘Multi-Agency Team’, which
was established to co-ordinate all activities associated with the collection of samples, thus ensuring compliance.
Assistant Commissioner ‘Central Intelligence Bureau’, was appointed to supervise the administration of the Non-
intimate DNA sample collection drive to all members of the Police Service including Special Reserve and
Supplemental Police.
The collection of non-intimate DNA samples will be an on-going exercise.

PART I & II — NIL
ommissio i
