Py Police Orders by

EK Commissioner of Police
ae Police Administration Building

yt Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
"OPRorecr ao SO Port of Spain
WaTH Prive
Wednesday 16" November, 2022.
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian employees of
the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
ee
No. 195 Departmental Order PARTI & Ill - NIL
PART II
COLLECTION OF BANK ACCOUNT NUMBERS FOR THE PAYMENT OF SALARIES TO
GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES VIA AUTOMATED CLEARING HOUSE (ACH)

BACKGROUND

The Government of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago (GORTT) is seeking to strengthen its
financial management capacity to improve the efficiency of public expenditure. In light of this a
comprehensive Public Financial Management (PFM) reform strategy has been approved, of which
the implementation of an Integrated Financial Management Information System (IFMIS) forms a
strategic part. This provides for the improvement of the quality of service delivery to the population
by delivering greater accountability and efficiency of revenue collection and public expenditure.
A significant feature of this Module is the ability to download and print your pay slips. This facility
will allow personnel the convenience of accessing and printing their pay slips from the comfort of
their home or at their desks.

1. Further, the Government of Trinidad and Tobago is pursuing methods to improve the
financial systems throughout the public service, by the creation of a cashless society. This
digital thrust will greatly enhance the accountability framework within the Public Service.

a In this regard, the Treasury Division in partnership with the Central Bank of Trinidad and
Tobago (CBTT) and the Bankers Association of Trinidad and Tobago (BATT) is
aggressively pursuing Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT), which will be done on a phased
basis. Phase 1 being the payment of Government employees' salaries via the Automated
Clearing House (ACH) system. All other local payments will be done incrementally.

3. Further, due to the increased requirements placed on the international banking sector with
respect to compliance with the Anti Money Laundering (AML) Act and Foreign Accounts
Tax Compliance Act (FATCA), banks are moving away from paper- based payment
methods i.e. Cash and cheques, to digital payments such as ACH and Real Time Gross
Settlement (RTGS).

. /2


--- page break ---

195/2
4, ACH is an electronic clearing system in which payment orders or instructions are
exchanged among financial institutions and processed in batches by a data processing
centre i.e. the ACH system facilitates payments by moving money between bank
accounts. The ACH payment system provides a reliable and secure platform for
processing transactions used in payroll, direct deposit, tax refunds, consumer bills, and
many more payment services worldwide. Employees will need to create a user profile to
access the ESS and set up their ‘personal authentication’ on the system. To do this, the
employee must have a copy of a recent pay slip on hand to register as the information
contained therein is required to create the user profile.
Challenges with the current system
5. Currently, salaries of Government employees are processed by banks via cheques
accompanied by employee listings provided by the Ministries and Departments. The
banks utilize employees’ NIS Numbers to map to their bank accounts. This current
method requires significant manual effort by the banks and is not only time consuming
but can result in errors. Additionally, the commercial banks have advised of their
intention to replace the manual processing of government's payroll with automated
processing via the ACH System in an effort to improve the efficiency of salary payments
across the Public Service.
Benefits of Salary Payments using the ACH
6. The ACH platform provides a faster, more efficient system for processing salaries. It is
anticipated that salaries will be credited directly to employees' accounts via ACH within
24/hrs of receipt by a bank. Banks will no longer require the time for manual processing
of salaries from Ministries i.e. requirement for cheques to be sent four (4) days prior to
payment date. The risk of bank processing errors and the associated delays with manual
processing will be eliminated. The above will result in less employee queries/complaints
related to delayed salary payments.
ACH Requirements
7. In preparation for the implementation of this new payment method the Comptroller of
Accounts is seeking to update your information on the IGP/IhRIS to ensure a seamless
transition. Therefore, it is necessary to obtain the bank account numbers for all employees
within your Ministry/Department. A query of the IGP/ThRIS database revealed that only
58% of employees’ bank account numbers were captured on the system.
Procedure for Collection of Bank Account Numbers
Employees paid on IGP/ IhRIS
8. Employees whose net salaries/allowances are currently paid through Commercial Banks
are required to use the recently implemented Employee Self Service (ESS) to verify your
banking information. Comptroller of Accounts Circular Memorandum dated June 24,
2022 - "Roll out of the IGPAHRIS Employee Self Service Module (ESS)" refers. In
this regard, you are directed as follows: -
../3


--- page break ---

195/3

a. Where your account number is accurately recorded on the IGP/ThRIS you are required to
‘sign off on Form IA "Verification of Bank Account Number" This form ts to be
submitted to your Pay Sheet Clerk. See Appendix 1.

b. Where your account number is inaccurately recorded on the IGP/IhRIS you are required
to complete the ESS Data Maintenance Form and submit to your Pay Sheet Clerk. See
Appendix 11.

c. Where your bank account number is not recorded on the system you are required to
complete Form IB "Input of Bank Account Number" by:

(i) Inputting your account number preferably type written, and

(ii) Submitting the form to the Pay Sheet Clerk for input on the IGP/IhRIS with
supporting documentation i.e. Copy of the top of your bank statement. Please
note you are not to provide your financial information. See Appendix 111.

NB: The soft copies of the above mentioned forms will be made available to all accounting

units,

Employees paid Via Separate Cheques

9. Where employees’ net salaries/allowances are currently paid via manual pay sheets they
are requested to complete a bank authorization form to immediately arrange to have such
payments made through their respective Commercial Bank. The existing Bank
Authorization Form (AG-21A) is to be used for this purpose. The employee is therefore
also required to verify that the information inputted on the IGP/ ThRIS is accurate by
using the ESS.

10. Ministries/Departments are advised that the relevant forms must reach the Pay Sheet
Clerks not later than August 05, 2022.

11. Permanent Secretaries/ Head of Departments must ensure that this exercise is completed
within the given time frame. You can monitor the input of account numbers in your
Ministry/Department by requesting a report from JIGP/ITHRIS on the achievement of this
process. You may also request a report with respect to the officers who have yet to comply
with the directive.

Updating the IGP/IhRIS Database

12. Upon receipt of the banking details from employees, it is the responsibility of the Pay
Sheet Clerks in the Ministries and Departments to carry out the following procedures as
outlined hereunder:

a. The inputting of banking details on the IGP /IhRIS system for both zero (0)
and one (1) record where applicable;
b. The printing of the Daily Transaction Report on the data inputted on the
system (Daily/weekly/monthly depending on volume) for verification.
4


--- page break ---

195/4

13. The Pay Sheet Clerk must ensure that the correct account numbers have been entered on
the system and that the various documents are properly completed. Due care and accuracy
is required in completing this exercise to ensure that salaries are credited to the correct
assigned accounts. The Government of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago will not be
held liable for improperly verified information signed off by employees.

14. Once the Report is validated by the Pay Sheet Clerk and a senior officer in the Accounting
Unit, no changes will be made thereafter unless written authorization is sent by the
employee to the Officer-in Charge of the Sub-Accounting Unit i.e. if he/she requests a
change in banking institution which would be done in the usual manner.

15. | The onus is on the employee to validate the accuracy of the information inputted by
using the ESS. If at any stage of the process there is a variation between the information
on the system, he/she is requested to confirm the correct details and sign off on a new
Form 1 A Ministries/Departments must ensure that the verification process is completed
for all employees not later than August 30, 2022.

Security of Information

16. | Employees are advised that the procedures as outlined in this Circular Memorandum have
incorporated internal control measures that would ensure the confidentiality of bank
account numbers and the preservation of the integrity of the information on the system.
These internal control measures include:

a) The segregation of duties between the Pay Sheet Clerk and the Verification
Officer. This ensures that no one individual has the authority to enter
information on the system without proper confirmation by another delegated
officer;

b) Restriction of access to bank account information, both in terms of the
physical documents and the computerized data. Proper arrangements must
therefore, be made to store completed forms and Reports in a locked cabinet,
to which only the Officer in Charge of the Sub-Accounting Unit has access.
These documents must be securely stored until correct assignment of salaries
has been confirmed.

General
17.‘ The full co-operation of all Permanent Secretaries, Heads of Departments and staff of
Payroll and Accounting Units is critical to the successful implementation of the ACH
method of payment. Should you require further information you can contact the Financial
Management Branch, Treasury Division, Level 19, Eric Williams Financial Building,
Independence Square, Port-of-Spain at Telephone No. 612-9700 Ext 2913/2912.
ommissioner of Poli


--- page break ---

Form 1A Appendix 1
Verification of Bank Account Number
Official Use Only
Employee ID

BLOCK LETTERS SURNAME FIRST NAME OTHER NAME

sts.nomber TT TT TT TTT
Bank Name.............ccccecsscccccscceccecsscesceesssesssceeeessensensesceseeeseneesescescrecessnes
Bank Address: ..........cccccccescecsrcescccausenccsecescecscseteessecscscseeseeeceescescecesessesees

penkaccmnomie TT TT TT PE TTT
TYPE OF ACCOUNT (Please Tick)

Savings [| Chequeing [_]

Thereby certify that the banking information detailed above as viewed through the
Employee Self Service and stored on the IhRIS is accurate.


--- page break ---

Data Maintenance Form i ‘
1. Date ;
wa on pay Employee Self-Service (ESS)
2. Employee ID (if known):
3. Surname:
4. First Name:
5. Ministry / Dept:
6. Maintenance (please tick one): ( Data incorrect and needs changing
Note: Please use separate O New Data needs to be added
forms for each of these O Please reset my password
categories.
O Other:
7. Data (attach as many pages as you need):
Field Name* New Data / Updated Data
* Use the same field name as it appears on the ESS pages
For Official Use:
A, ie Ofriceghecelved: Employee’s Signature {dated above)
2. Maintenance Complete:


--- page break ---

Form 1B Appendix 111
Input of Bank Account Number
Official Use Only
Employee ID

BLOCK LETTERS SURNAME FIRST NAME OTHER NAME

sas namie TT TT TT TTT
Bank Name...........cscscscccccceccecvasscccssccessnscsccccesesenessssessescecsescecseececseessseues
Bank Address: ..........ccccccsssscssscececcccccesscessssssseesccessssececssseceneeesseneesscance sess

frac asomrmenbe [TTT TP
TYPE OF ACCOUNT (Please Tick)

Savings [| Chequeing [ |

I hereby certify that the banking information detailed above is accurate.


--- page break ---

A Official Use Only
ran Form 1B Employee ID
7p. rc ne Input of Bank Account Number ded dew endo heer h OE RE METER OEE FOOD EOE
To be completed by all Regular Police Officers/Civilians of the TTPS, paid through IHRIS.

A copy of the top of your bank statement showing the account number through which you are
currently receiving salary, along with this form MUST be submitted by August 5, 2022.
Completed forms are to be submitted to the Chief Clerk of
Divisional Offices/Branch/Units/Sections or scanned and emailed to ess(@ ttps.gov.tt
For any concerns or queries contact 612-0102 ext 12455 or 12381
MINISTRY/DEPARTMENT: .... YINS/TT IPS. oo... cceccescccsseccecceeneceesseveneecneeesneoeenaeensens

REGULAR POLICE OFFICER |__| CIVILIAN OFFICER |_|
If Regular Police Officer; REGIMENTAL NUMBER .......sccsseececececees
BLOCK LETTERS SURNAME FIRST NAME OTHER NAME
Contact Number: ........sccccscccseccsccssscccccccccsccscvecccsscccnscsessessccccsscecscnccccnvecoussecessesesousees
Email ACCreSS: .......cscreccascvecserevccsvenccessesscccssescnccosecscccenensvcrvses sors sosseseesensesenessensenoeees
exw TTT TTT TTT
IBAMENAINCS occ e cesses tose 8s one nGacsne To ToceTe> Sus ine sUseus Sue Nee SSasaesarsisensenassosaseSsersseesesceneess sues
Branch Address: .......-.ccceesccccseccrscccccccccscccceccsscnccsscconccesuctansansseeanssessenecanesanccssessucaons
Sc
TYPE OF ACCOUNT (Please Tick)
Savings| _| Chequeing [|
I hereby certify that the bank information detailed above is accurate.
