~T!)
C)
a Police Orders by
YY, “4K Commissioner of Police
Wa Police Administration Building
Se oS Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
‘ .
nore ann so Port of Spain
Wednesday 16" November, 2022.
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian employees of
the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
No. 196 Departmental Order PART I & III - NIL
PART II
ROLL OUT OF THE IGP/THRIS EMPLOYEE SELF SERVICE MODULE (ESS)
In an effort to improve service delivery to employees within the Public Service, the Treasury
Division has embarked on an initiative to leverage the IGP/ThRIS to allow personnel to view and
verify their Biodata and Job information. To achieve this, the Project Management Office is
operationalizing the ESS Module of the IGP/JhRIS.

1. A significant feature of this Module is the ability to download and print your pay slips.
This facility will allow personnel the convenience of accessing and printing their pay
slips from the comfort of their home or at their desks.

2 As we move forward towards digitalization and the use of technology, you are advised
that additional features are being developed and will be implemented incrementally, such
as request for Job Letters and submission of Leave applications.

3. The ESS will allow users a ‘view only access’, in this instance, to their personal
information. Listed hereunder are the functionalities of the ESS available for viewing by
employees:

I. Personal information such as: -
a. Emergency contacts
b. Home and Mailing address
c. Name and name change
d. Contact information
e. Date of Birth
f. Gender
g. Highest educational level
h. Marital Status
Ih. Bank information including Account numbers and Bank name
Ill. Pay slips (which are downloadable)
IV. Add/update Email Addresses to forward pay slip
/2


--- page break ---

196/2

4, This Circular Memorandum seeks to update employees’ personal information, in
particular, bank account information by August 5, 2022. All personnel are therefore asked
to access the ESS through the URL link below:

https://ess.ihris. gov.tt:7 150/ess/signon.html

5. Employees will need to create a user profile to access the ESS and set up their ‘personal
authentication’ on the system. To do this, the employee must have a copy of a recent
pay slip on hand to register as the information contained therein is required to create the
user profile.

6. The 'ESS Registration’ link is available on the ‘sign on’ page. You will be required to
register for an ‘ESS username and password’ which would be emailed to you.
Therefore, please ensure a valid email address is entered in the system. This username
and password can then be used to login to the system. Complete Instructions on accessing
the ESS online and registering a profile are shown at Appendix I.

ue Should discrepancies be identified by an employee, an ESS Data Maintenance Form must
be completed, signed and submitted to the respective Human Resource/Payroll
Department along with supporting documents to effect the change. If changes are
justifiable, the Human Resource or Payroll Department would update the system
accordingly. The Data Maintenance Form can be downloaded on the ESS web page. See
Appendix II.

8. A Training Manual, which will guide the registration process and provide guidelines for
the use of the ESS, is available on the ESS Site to facilitate this exercise.

9. Also, the Subject Matter Experts (SMEs) for IGP/ThRIS, will also provide the necessary
support to the Human Resource/Payroll Officers in guiding them through this exercise
and can be contacted at 627-0320 or 623-5991.

10. All Permanent Secretaries and Heads of Departments must ensure that the contents of this
Circular Memorandum are brought to the attention of all personnel in their
Ministry/Department.

wn Gon) eg
ommissioner of Police


--- page break ---

Appendix I
Instructions to Create an ESS Profile

1. The ESS web page can be accessed through the URL

https://ess.ihris.gov.tt:7 150/ess/signon.html

2. Employees need to create an ESS profile and set up their personal authentication by
clicking on the register link on the ESS web page.

3. A recent copy of a pay slip is needed to register, as the information contained therein is
required to create a user profile.

4, A valid email address must be entered on the ESS profile. The email address can be a
‘gov.tt’ or personal email.

5. After entering the required information to create an ESS profile, a user name and
password will be sent to the email address entered on the system. This user name and
password is used to login to the ESS.

6. There is the option to download and print pay slips or send it to the email address entered
on the system.

7. On the ESS web page there is a link to download an ESS user training manual. This
manual provides guidance on using the ESS.

8. In cases where the employee's Bio data is incorrect, a Data Maintenance Form must be
completed, signed and submitted to the respective Human Resource/Payroll Department
along with supporting documents. The Data Maintenance Form can be downloaded on
the ESS web page.


--- page break ---

Data Maintenance Form i I
1. Date ;
Year Month Day Employee Self-Service (ESS)
2. Employee ID (if known):
3. Surname:
4. First Name:
5. Ministry / Dept:
6. Maintenance (please tick one): Data incorrect and needs changing
Pr O New Data needs to be added
ote: Please use separate
forms for each of these 0 Please reset my password
categories.
) Other:
7. Data (attach as many pages as you need):
Field Name* New Data / Updated Data
* Use the same field name as it appears on the ESS pages
For Official Use:
1. HR Officer Received: Employee’s Signature (dated above)
2. Maintenance Complete:
