Za
Ks) Police Orders by
ae Commissioner of Police
Way Police Administration Building
JA, Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
ee er Port of Spain
th
"monet now Monday 5" December, 2022
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian employees of
the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
No. 209 Departmental Order PART I- NIL
PART-II
Reproduced hereunder is a Notice from the National Trust of Trinidad and Tobago, Ministry of Planning
and Development, dated 3’ November, 2022.
Ref: GB(06/21)BL03/2022a
Commissioner of Police McDonald Jacob
Police Administration Building
Corner of Edward and Sackville Streets
PORT OF SPAIN
NOTICE OF LISTING OF PROPERTY OF INTEREST
(Sections 8(5) and 8(6) of the National Trust of Trinidad and Tobago Act, Chap. 40:53)
ST. JAMES POLICE BARRACKS AND COMMISSIONER’S RESIDENCE
Take notice that the Nationa] Trust of Trinidad and Tobago with the approval of the Minister of Planning and
Development has listed the St. James Police Barracks and Commissioner’s Residence as a property of
interest in accordance with section 8(2) of the National Trust of Trinidad and Tobago Act, Chap. 40:53 (“the
Act”) by list dated 21 June 2022, published in the Trinidad and Tobago gazette No. 144 Vol. 61 on 12%
August, 2022. This property of interest is found to be 10.01 ha situate at #1, Samaan Drive, Western Main
Road, Port of Spain and is more particularly described in the aforementioned publication of the Trinidad and
Tobago Gazette.
St. James Police Barracks and Commissioner’s Residence has been listed as a Grade B property of
interest. In this regard, please note the following:
The National Trust Regulations defines a Grade B property as a “an area, site or place of natural beauty
or response that would be despoiled if it were to be altered by the introduction or removal of any flora,
fauna or work of man” (Regulation 3(3)(b)).
You are asked to note that under section 27 of the Act, a person who alters, damages, injures, or defaces any
listed property or demolishes or destroys or causes to be demolished or destroyed any listed property otherwise
than in accordance with the written permission of the Council, commits an offence and shall be liable on
summary conviction to a fine of five thousand dollars and the Court may also order that person to pay the
National Trust of Trinidad and Tobago the cost to repair or restore the property.
A


--- page break ---

209/2
This notice is given to you as the person known to be the owner/person in possession of this property of
interest. Please note that the listing of this property became effective on the above-mentioned date of
publication in the Trinidad and Tobago Gazette. For further information, you may contact the National Trust
of Trinidad and Tobago at 225-4750 or via electronic mail at heritage@nationaltrust.tt.
Dated this 3" day of November 2022.
PART Ii - NIL
QQ
Contmissioner 6 T
