ey Police Orders by
AG Commissioner of Police
ray Police Administration Building
AVF Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
— Port of Spain
70 oe
“mogecy awe Monday 28", November 2022
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
No. 213/2022 Departmental Order PART I & III NIL
PART IE

IMPLEMENTATION OF COMMANDERS WHATSAPP CHAT GROUP

1. Information
In accordance with Strategic Priority #4 titled “Information and Communication
Technology" of the Trinidad and Tobago Police (TTPS) Strategic Plan 2022-2024, a
Commanders' WhatsApp Group Chat was established to facilitate the timely dissemination
and sharing of official information in support of real-time decision making processes. This
prominent social media platform can be utilized in the battle against crime as a means of
communication.

2.0 Composition of Group Chat
Participants in the Group Chat will include the Commissioner of Police, Deputy
Commissioners, Assistant Commissioners, Divisional Commanders, Superintendents in
charge of Sections, Units, and Branches, Head of Sections and Representatives of Specialist
Units.

3.0 Administration
The Chief Clerk/Staff Officer in the office of the Commissioner of Police will maintain
and administer the Commanders' WhatsApp Group Conversation and will be responsible
for adding and removing officers from the group chat.

4.0 Rationale
The TTPS must embrace and employ technology as a crime-fighting tool, and improve its
overall efficacy by bolstering its communication structures. The Executive of the TTPS,
Divisional Commanders, Superintendents in charge of Sections, Units, and Branches,
Head of Sections and Representatives of Specialist Units have been issued mobile phones
with mobile data plans, allowing them continuous access to various social media


--- page break ---

213/2
platforms, including WhatsApp. In addition, it expands the communication alternatives
available to the previously stated officers.
5.0 Objectives
The sharing of brief and initial facts on criminal activities, police emergencies and other
unplanned and disruptive national crisis across all police divisions on the Chat will: -

i. Allow for the planning of appropriate and timely responses, encourage greater
collaboration and effective mobilization of both internal and external resources,
where and when applicable.

ii. | Assist and support decision making at the executive level.
iii. Allow for feedback to the National Security Council and the Ministry of National
Security and other National Security Agencies when and where applicable
6.0 Unauthorised Distribution of Information
The Commanders WhatsApp Group Chat is an official communication. Members of the
chat are reminded it is a Breach of Confidence to distribute without proper authority or
communicate by any means to the public, press, or to any unauthorised person, any matter
connected with the Service.
7.0 Conclusion
In light of the foregoing, effective immediately, the Commanders WhatsApp Group Chat
is an official communication medium for the sharing of the brief facts of all Serious Crimes,
Critical Incidents of a national nature, all Occurrences, and any other information that may
be vital in the fight against crime.
The Commanders Group Chat cannot be replaced by any other WhatsApp Group Chat.
The WhatsApp Group Chat for Commanders does not substitute the filing of regular
morning reports.
This Departmental amends Part H DO 168/2009 (Cell Phone Issuance and Usage) and Part
II DO 188/2011 (E-Mail Communication).
Commissioner of Police
