Police Orders by Erla Christopher
Commissioner of Police
P< Police Administration Building
ra Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
Port-of-Spain
Sess Fan Fist na Thursday 6" February, 2023
"Pemonecr an so (This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian employees of
the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
No.29° ~~—~-—s(DepartmentalOrdar===2=2=~=S*CS*é“‘“‘*”:CCéAARR CCN
PART II
Police _officers_offering services_as surety for Defendants / Accused persons before the
Criminal Courts
Information:
It has become necessary that the Commissioner of Police identify guidelines in relation to Police
Officers offering services as sureties to deal with a recent practice occurring throughout the Courts
of Trinidad & Tobago. The policy guidelines are necessary to protect the police officer from
becoming involved in a situation that could result in a conflict or give the appearance of a conflict.
Bail is a recognizance or bond taken by a duly authorized person, to obtain the release of an accused
person ensuring their appearance at the appointed place, date and time
to answer the charge(s) laid against them. This is a right enshrined in Section 5 (2) (f) (iii) (2) of
the Constitution of Trinidad & Tobago. Section 12 of Bail Act Chapter 4:60 identifies the
conditions whereby Bail is granted, one such condition is that A Court may require any person
applying for bail to provide, as a condition for bail before his release, a surety to secure his
surrender to custody.
A surety is a person who agrees to be responsible for the Defendant/Accused by ensuring that the
Defendant/ Accused follows the conditions for bail and attends court as required. The surety gives
an undertaking to pay a sum of money (recognisance) or have his property forfeited if the accused
does not comply with the bail conditions imposed. An undertaking is a means by which a promise
is made to do something and it is legally binding with consequences in the event that it is not
carried out.


--- page break ---

29/2
An officer’s involvement in relation to giving an undertaking to stand as surety before a Court can
directly or indirectly pose a conflict with the interests of the Trinidad & Tobago Police Service
and that of their public obligations. The objectivity and integrity of an officer may be compromised
if he or she acts in matters affecting the financial interests of people or persons with whom the
officer is closely related. Offering oneself as a surety whilst in the capacity of a Police Officer can
cause potential conflicts or the appearance of favouritism that arise whenever a public official's
personal loyalty competes with the need to make objective decisions.
Therefore, the Commissioner of Police wishes to remind all serving members of the Trinidad &
Tobago Police Service of Regulation 133(a) of the Police Service Regulations which states that:
“An Officer shall not engage in any activity, occupation or undertaking which would impair
his usefulness as an officer or in any way conflict with the interest of the service.”

PART III

Members of the Special Reserve offering services as surety for Defendants / Accused persons
before the Criminal Courts
Information:
It has become necessary that the Commissioner of Police identify guidelines in relation to Police
Officers offering services as sureties to deal with a recent practice occurring throughout the Courts
of Trinidad & Tobago. The policy guidelines are necessary to protect the police officer from
becoming involved in a situation that could result in a conflict or give the appearance of a conflict.
Bail is a recognizance or bond taken by a duly authorized person, to obtain the release of an accused
person ensuring their appearance at the appointed place, date and _ time
to answer the charge(s) laid against them. This is a right enshrined in Section 5 (2) (f) (iii) (2) of
the Constitution of Trinidad & Tobago
Section 12 of Bail Act Chapter 4:60 identifies the conditions whereby Bail is granted inter alia:
(2) A Court may require any person applying for bail to provide, as a condition for bail before his
release, a surety to secure his surrender to custody.

3


--- page break ---

. A4
A surety is a person who agrees to be responsible for the Defendant/Accused by ensuring that the
Defendant/ Accused follows the conditions for bail and attends court as required. The surety gives
an undertaking to pay a sum of money (recognisance) or have his property forfeited if the accused
i does not comply with the bail conditions imposed.
An undertaking is a means by which a promise is made to do something and it is legally binding
with consequences in the event that it is not carried out. A member of the Special Reserve’s
involvement in relation to giving an undertaking to stand as surety before a Court can directly or
Indirectly pose a conflict with the interests of the Trinidad &Tobago Police Service, the Special
Reserve Police and that of their public obligations. The objectivity and integrity of an officer may
be compromised if he or she acts in matters affecting the financial interests of people or persons
with whom the officer is closely related. Offering oneself as a surety whilst in the capacity of a
Special Reserve Police Officer can cause potential conflicts or the appearance of favouritism that
arise whenever a public official's personal loyalty competes with the need to make objective
decisions.
Therefore, the Commissioner of Police wishes to remind all serving members of the Trinidad &
Tobago Police Service of Section 5(1) f of the Special Reserve Police Act Chapter 15:03 which
states that a member of the Special Reserve shall not engage in:
Any act, conduct or neglect to the prejudice of good order and discipline or in violation of
duty in his office, or any other misconduct as a member of the Special Reserve Police,
GBrurtsphar, loP
Commissioner of Police
