«key Police Orders by Mrs Erla Christopher
Px Commissioner of Police
eve Police Administration Building
WF Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
ope Port of Spain
20, ooo
rovect ano Tuesday 27" February, 2024
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian employees of
the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
Se
No. 32 Departmental Order PARTI & II — NIL
PART II
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE CUSTOMER SERVICE UNIT (CSU)
1. Establishment
The Customer Service Unit (CSU) shall be established within the service with effect from Monday
1 March, 2024. The main office would be located at the Community Relations Riverside Plaza,
Besson Street, Port of Spain which shall be its base of operation, however for operational purposes
Customer Service Representatives would be assigned to all Seventy-Seven Stations in all Police
Divisions.
2. Intention
The intention of this order is to outline the establishment of the CSU and why it was formed as the
formation of the Unit is designed to fulfil the Trinidad and Tobago Service strategic plan for the
period 2013-2016 but exemplifies the goal of making the Service a world-class establishment in
keeping with the TTPS strategic plan for 2022-2024. This order is also designed to make known to
the Police Service, as a whole that the CSU is part of the landscape of the organisation.
3. Administrative Structure
The Deputy Commissioner of Police, “Administration and Operational Support” shall have overall
responsibility for operations of the CSU, however the head of the CSU shall fall under the
administrative directive of the Assistant Commissioner of Police, “Specialized Support” and
supervised by a Coordinator who shall be the rank of an Assistant Superintendent of Police. The
Administrative Inspector and Sergeant from the Community Policing Secretariat shall be the
Inspector and Sergeant for the CSU, which shall comprise mainly of Special Reserve Police.
eval


--- page break ---

32/2
The CSU will be staffed administratively as follows:
SANCTIONED STRENGTH
J RANK CNUMBERS
ASSISTANT SUPERINTENDENT
CORPORAL
CONSTABLES
po TOTALS
DISTRIBUTION OF STRENGTH
DIVISION INSP CONST | TOTAL
SECRETARIAT | i | o | 0 [ i [1 [3 7
EASTERN ss
NORTHEASTERN | | TT
NORTHERN ss
NORTHCENTRAL [| | TTT
CENTRAL es
WESTERN a
SOUTHERN a
SOUTHWESTERN | | | TS
TOBAGO a ee
PORTOFSPAIN, | | TT TT
TOTAL 1 | of oa as as
4. Roles and Responsibilities
The ability to provide exceptional customer service is recognized as one of the key components to
the organization’s success and personal achievement. While generally the law enforcement officers
are tasked first and foremost with maintaining public safety, for the Customer Service
Representative, his or her role and responsibility compliments the task of the other law enforcement
officers, as he or she will interact with the TTPS’ customers, be it both internal and external, and be
the conduit to customer driven problem solving. As such, the Customer Service Representative’
work is highly customer-oriented, whether those customers are other frontline enforcement officers,
the courts, or citizens, and must be demonstrated with professionalism and courtesy.
./3


--- page break ---

32/3
5. SKILLS AND ABILITIES
¢ Ability to cope with situations firmly, courteously, tactfully and with respect for the
rights of others.
° Ability to analyze situations quickly and objectively, and to determine a proper course
of action to be taken.
¢ Ability to perform effectively both independently and as part of a team.
e Ability to handle, grasp and operate radio controls, weapons and equipment necessary
to perform all job functions.
e Ability to work long hours, nights, weekends and public holidays.
¢ Ability to maintain and ensure the confidentiality of privileged information.
® Ability to communicate effectively both orally and in writing.
* Computer literacy at a level adequate to perform daily duties.
6. CUSTOMER SERVICE SECRETARIAT
The Customer Service Secretariat (CSS) shall operate in two sections. The Administrative Section
shall be administrated by a Corporal who shall be an officer from the Customer Service Unit, and
the Secretariat shall be chaired by the Assistant Commissioner with responsibility for Community
Relations who shall be administrator of the Customer Service Remedial Programme. The Secretariat
shall comprise of the Assistant Commissioner Community Relations (Chair) Assistant
Commissioner ‘Division’ Assistant Superintendent Customer Service, Head Police Social Unit,
Program Manager Advance Program Training (PTA), Corporal Customer Service and any other
member of the executive who may be invited based on competency to assist with particular issues.
Duties of the Customer Service Secretariat (Administration)
1. Receive complaints from customers via all approved mediums.
2. Provide immediate relief to customers making complaints via approved mediums.
3. Replenish Customer Service Forms in stations.
4. Clear Customer Service Bins.
5. Provide data on Customer Service feedback to Monitoring and Evaluation Unit.
6. Creating Programs such as Mystery Customer and any other programs to evaluate
Customer Service Standards.
7. Make recommendations to the Commissioner of Police via the appropriate channels
on methods of improving the quality of service based on Customers Feedback.
/4


--- page break ---

32/4
Duties of the Customer Service Secretariat (Remedial Programme)
1. Administer the Customer Service Remedial Programme
2. Propose improvement targets for officers or locations chosen for the Customer Service
Remedial Programme.
3. Conduct periodic audits to measure progress during months 2 and 3 of the programme
and shall share the results with the officers on at least a fortnightly basis.
4. Submit progress reports with recommendations to the sponsor for his/her attention and
action.
5. Any other duties assigned to the secretariat by the executive.
7. GENERAL
The establishment of the Unit will enhance the delivery of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service
as well as its image. As a result of the focus of the Unit it will be staffed by Police Officers
However, where and when necessary, a supporting role may be played by civilian staff members.
Commissioner of Police


--- page break ---

JOB DESCRIPTION
JOB TITLE: ASSISTANT SUPERINTENDENT/COORDINATOR
Reports to: The ACP ‘Specialized Support’, DCP ‘Administration and Operational Support’,
Commissioner of Police.
Supervision given to: Customer Service Representatives/Police Corporals and Constables.

1. Monitor the performance of Customer Service Representatives who shall be of the
rank of Corporal and Constables.

2. Make policy recommendations with respect to the operations of the Unit.

3. Ensure that programmes under the control of the Unit are properly administered on a
day-to-day basis.

4. Assist in the development and production of reports to facilitate the professional
development of the Police Service.

5. Identify training needs and recommends and implements suitable training programmes
for staff development.

6. Lecture to officers of both First and Second Divisions in new trends in customer
service and provide solutions for complaints made on improving the quality of service
offered.

7. Recommend officers to be trained in customer service.

8. Visit stations and log the quality of service provided and suggest improvements.

9. Review the performance appraisal process to ensure compliance with established
standards.

10. Monitor and review the work performed by staff and provides technical advice and
guidance in respect of complex matters.

11. Review and certify correspondence, reports and other documents prepared by junior
staff.

12. Represent the Unit at meetings, seminars and workshops.

13. Continuously monitor and evaluate the efficiency and effectiveness of customer
service delivery methods and procedures.

14. Ensure the implementation of policies and adherence to rules, regulations and standard
operating procedures.

15. Coordinates and supervises arrangements for special events and operations.

16. Stay abreast of new trends and innovations in the field of customer service.

17. Perform other duties related to the office that may be assigned from time to time.

Minimum experience and Training
At least Fifteen (15) years’ experience as a law enforcement officer with training in Customer
Service and an Associated Degree from a recognized institution or any equivalent combination of
experience and training in Customer Service, must be a subject matter expert.


--- page break ---

JOB TITLE: CORPORAL/SUPERVISOR
Reports to: Assistant Superintendent CSU and the Inspector and Sergeant attached to Community
Relations.

1. Maintain a positive, empathetic and professional attitude toward customers always.

2. Supervise where necessary junior staff.

3. Ensures that all customers, visitors and members of staff are treated with courtesy and
efficiency.

4. Assist with customers’ queries and complaints, referring where necessary.

5. Communicate with customers through various approved channels.

6. Disseminate accurate information to customers both on the phone and by personal
interaction.

7. Ensure that the reception area is neatly maintained.

8. Ensure that customer’s complaint is treated with the strictest confidentiality.

9. Keep records of customer interactions, transactions, comments and complaints.

10. Ensure the prompt forwarding of information to the necessary department.

11. Provide feedback on the efficiency of the customer service process.

12. Ensure customer satisfaction and provide professional customer support.

13. Write and submit monthly reports to the head of CSU.

14. Resolve complaints made at Station council and town meetings.

15. Inspect and certify log books, abstracts, pocket diaries and other documents.

16. Recommend Leave.

17. Inspect of uniform and equipment.

18. Appraise and evaluate the performance of junior staff.

19. Visit officers on assignments to observe their appearance and activities and give
guidance and directions where necessary.

20. Perform other duties related to the office which may be assigned by the head of the
CSU from time to time.

21. Ensure that there is full compliance with Standing Orders, Departmental Orders,
Divisional Orders, Laws and Policies of the Service.


--- page break ---

JOB TITLE: POLICE CONSTABLE/CUSTOMER SERVICE REPRESENTATIVE
Reports to: Assistant Superintendent CSU and the Inspector and Sergeant attached to the
Community Policing Secretariat and the Corporal of Police attached to Unit.

1. Maintain a positive, empathetic and professional attitude toward customers always.

2. Ensure that all customers, visitors and members of staff are treated with courtesy and

efficiency.

3. Assist with customers’ queries and complaints, referring where necessary.

4. Communicate with customers through various approved channels.

5. Disseminate accurate information to customers both on the phone and by personal
interaction.

6. Ensure that the reception area is neatly maintained.

7. Ensure that the customer’s complaint is treated with the strictest confidentiality.

8. Keep records of customer interactions, transactions, comments and complaints.

9. Ensure the prompt forwarding of information to the necessary department.

10. Provide feedback on the efficiency of the customer service process,

11. Ensure customer satisfaction and provide professional customer support.

12. Write and submit monthly reports to the head of CSU.

13. Replenish customer service forms.

14. Resolve complaints made at Station council and town meetings.

15. Perform other duties related to the office which may be assigned by the head of the
CSU, the Inspector and Sergeant from time to time.

16. Comply fully with Standing Orders, Departmental Orders, Divisional Orders, Laws
and Policies of the Service.

17. Work with First and Second Division officers to establish station council and town
meeting.
