Ks) Police Orders by
CAS Commissioner of Police
ues Police Administration Building
ao og Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
— a Port of Spain
Prrorecr an 5 Thursday 17" March, 2022.
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
No.42 Departmental Order PART I
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE NATIONAL OPERATIONAL TASK FORCE (N.0.T.F)
This Departmental Order No. 42/2022 rescinds Departmental Order No. 49/2019 Re:
Establishment of the Special Operations Response Team (S.O.R.T.) in the Trinidad and Tobago
Police Service and any other Order/Directive/Instruction regarding the administration and
operation of the aforementioned unit with immediate effect.
1. INTRODUCTION
The National Operations Fusion Centre (N.O.F.C) was established in 2019 by the National
Security Council. Subsequently, the Minister of National Security facilitated a consultative
process with the Commissioner of Police (COP), The Chief of Defence Staff (CDS) and the
Director of Strategic Services Agency (Dir. SSA) to implement and operationalize the NOFC.
The N.O.F.C is intended to serve as a dedicated platform for the co-ordination of integrated
inter agency operations and logistical support amongst various law enforcement entities.
The escalating levels of crime and the increased sophistication of criminal activity calls for a
radical change to the approach in the fight against crime. The traditional methods of treating
with crime are severely challenged to meet the needs of society. Criminal minds have taken
advantage of the slow pace of development of operational capability to evade detection and
prosecution. The effect of this has been an upsurge in serious crime resulting in a rapid
deterioration of the fabric of society.
2. ESTABLISHMENT
The Commissioner of Police has taken a strategic decision to establish the National
Operational Task Force (N.O.T.F) within the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service (T.T.P.S)
with effect from 18" March 2022. N.O.T.F is classified as a Class One (1) Specialist Support
Unit within the TTPS. The N.O.T.F is tasked with dealing with crimes perpetrated by criminal
entities involved in the use of organized crimes, kidnapping for ransom, extortion, corruption
and related violence associated with, but not limited to the use of firearms, improvised
explosive devices and explosives, illegal drugs and trafficking.
../2


--- page break ---

42/2
3. MANDATE
The mandate of (N.O.T.F) is the support and Tactical Law Enforcement (TLE) arm of the
N.O.F.C and exists to protect and serve the people of Trinidad and Tobago through
preparation, prevention, response and recovery from organized crime and other serious crimes
of national significance.
4. OBJECTIVES
The objectives of the NOTF are to provide a standing Strike Element that can execute timely
action to detect, deter, prevent, response and provide recovery from Law Enforcement threats,
through direct intervention in the form of but not limited to:
Strike Element
e Kidnap /Victim Rescue Operations
e Close Target Reconnaissance (CTR)
e Small Team Jungle Special Operations
e High Risk Vehicle Interception
5. Role & Function of N.O.T.F
1. Focus efforts on crimes of national significance
2. To dismantle criminal enterprises involved in transnational crimes and terrorism within
Trinidad and Tobago.
3. To provide operational support to Domestic, Regional and International law enforcement
agencies both of a Governmental and Non-Governmental nature.
4. Execute concerted high impact, strategic operations against criminal enterprises.
5. Assists with the execution of high risk warrants.
6. Active shooter responses.
7. Any other roles that provide operational support throughout the TTPS and or other
domestic, regional and international agencies.
../3


--- page break ---

42/3
6. Administrative Structure
SENIOR SUPERINTENDENT LA.T.F / N.O.T.F
SUPERINTENDENT I.A.T.F SUPERINTENDENT N.O.T.F
Both Units (1.A.T.F and the N.O.T.F) will fall under the umbrella of the Inter Agency Task Force.
The N.O.T.F is assigned under the Senior Superintendent I.A.T.F for the purpose of administrative
management. The functions of Administrative & Operational management of the N.O.T.F lies
specifically with the Superintendent N.O.T.F.
Notice is hereby given that this Departmental Order amends the current structure of the Inter
Agency Task Force.
7. Assignment
Officers attached to the N.O.T.F, will be transferred to the Inter Agency Task Force (I.A.T.F)
and assigned to the N.O.T.F
The sanctioned Strength of the L.A.T.F and N.O.T.F are as follows
a | em EE |
Total Sanctioned Strength |1 [23/6 | 7_—([ 31/193 | 243 |
IATF a ed
NOTF es Ee ee
8. Offices:
The main Office of N.O.T.F shall be located at Camp Cumuto Barracks
../4


--- page break ---

42/4

9. Personnel
N.O.T.F personnel will consist of Police Officers with special skills, specialist training and
experience in specific functions.
Officers to be assigned will primarily be selected through a process of recruitment from
various Divisions, Branches, Sections and Units within and external to the T.T.P.S.
Upon completion of the requirements outline in the recruitment Departmental Order 04/2022,
selected officers will be required to successfully undergo a period of physical and classroom
training.

10. Remuneration Package
Given the dynamic, highly sensitive and high risk environment in which Officers at the
N.O.T.F will be required to function under, the following allowances are approved for
payment to all such Officers:

e Commuted Allowance

e Plain Clothes Allowance

11. Uniforms:
Officers attached to N.O.T.F will primarily wear the following:

1. Digital grey Camouflage (Battle Dress Uniform) with matching headwear.

2. On the right arm- The emblems of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service engraved
on a blue T.T.P.S Patch with the letters N.O.T.F at the bottom.

3. On the left arm- The National Flag emblem above and the emblems of the Trinidad
and Tobago Police Service engraved on a blue T.T.P.S Patch with the letters N.O.T.F
at the bottom.

4. On the front, right side of the uniform, the letters ““N.O.T.F”

5. On the front, left side of the uniform, the word “POLICE”

6. Black military or operational type boots.

This uniform will be issued primarily by the Superintendent N.O.T.F at the main office.
Police Officers may be required from time to time to wear Plain Clothes based on the nature of the
daily task so assigned.
Qf
Commissioner o
