FAN Police Orders by
Commissioner of Police
N77 Police Administration Building
rarese Aa LAs seer Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
s :
Prorecr asp so Port of Spain
Tuesday 4" April, 2022.
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian employees of
the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
nn
No. 49 Departmental Order PART I & Iii - NIL
PART Il
ENTITLEMENT FOR SUSPENDED / INTERDICTED OFFICERS
Departmental Orders No 137/2020, 71/2021 and 106/2021 are hereby rescinded and replaced
with Departmental Order No. 49/2022 with immediate effect.
1. INFORMATION
1.1 There currently exists, within the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service, a number of officers on

suspension and or interdiction whilst awaiting the completion of disciplinary or criminal
proceedings which have been instituted against them. Consequently, it has become necessary to
create a policy to address the various issues in relation to their leave entitlement, and payments that
may arise whilst an officer is on suspension/interdiction or when the suspension and or interdiction
is lifted.

Definitions:

Pay - means the rate of pay assigned to an office in a grade by a Remuneration Order, but does not
include the allowances.

Grade - includes a range given in the classification of offices set out in the Third Schedule of the Police
Service Act Chap 15:01.

Allowance - means compensation payable -

(a) in respect of a grade or in respect of some office in a grade, by reason of duties of a special nature;
(b) for duties that a police officer is required to perform in addition to the duties of his grade where those
duties relate to an office in the same grade or a higher grade; or

(c) for contingencies associated with the performance of his functions as a police officer and not taken
into consideration in fixing his pay;

Remuneration- Means pay and allowance.

Suspension - When a report or allegation is received by the Commissioner from which it appears that a
police officer may have committed an offence, and the Commissioner is of the opinion that the
public interest or the repute of the Service requires it, the Commissioner may in writing direct the
officer to cease to report for duty until further notice, and an officer so directed shall cease to
perform the functions of his office immediately.

../2


--- page break ---

49/2

Interdiction - Where disciplinary proceedings for his dismissal are instituted or criminal proceedings are
instituted against an officer and the Commissioner is of the opinion that the public interest or the
repute of the Service requires that the officer should immediately cease to perform the functions of
his office, the Commissioner shall, before making a decision whether or not to interdict the officer,
inform the officer in writing.

An officer interdicted shall receive such proportion of the pay of his office, not being less than one-half,
as the Commissioner may determine after taking into consideration the officer’s monthly
deductions, writing of his intention to interdict him and give the officer an opportunity to be heard.

Leave - Refers to that period of absence where a Police Officer is not rostered or required for any particular
duty.

Compensatory Leave - Refers to that period of absence granted to a Second Division Police Officer in
lieu of any excess hours performed during a work week.

Gratuitous leave - Refers to that period of absence granted by the Commissioner of Police to members of
the Service for extraordinary duties meritoriously performed in connection with major celebrations
or events e.g. Carnival celebrations, Elections etc.

Compensatory Days- Leave granted to a Public Officer who works or is required to work on a shift basis
which includes public holidays existing and proclaimed by the Government of Trinidad and Tobago.

2. INTENTION
This policy seeks to provide administrative guidelines for the entitlement to officers and lifting of
suspension and / or interdiction:
(a) Upon completion of matters for which an officer has been suspended and or interdicted.
(b) Where the officer has attained the age of retirement.
(c) Where the officer applies for optional retirement.
(d) Where the officer applies to resign.
(e) In the event an officer dies.
3. LEAVE ACCUMULATED PRIOR TO SUSPENSION
3.1 A suspended officer is entitled to the vacation leave which he has earned prior to the date of his
suspension/interdiction.
3.2 A suspended officer is entitled to the Compensatory days eared prior to the suspension and / or
interdiction.
3.3 A suspended officer is entitled to the gratuitous leave earned within the year just prior to the date of
suspension.
However, this leave will be granted only in the instance where the officer applied for such leave and
(a) Approval was not granted based on the exigencies of the service, or
(b) Where the officer was unable to apply for same before its expiration date due to his suspension.
3


--- page break ---

49/3
3.4 During the period of suspension an officer shall NOT be allowed to utilise any vacation, gratuitous or
compensatory days accumulated prior to the suspension.
4. ACCUMULATION OF VACATION LEAVE WHILST ON SUSPENSION

4.1 From the effective date of suspension, a suspended and / or interdicted officer is NOT entitled to earn
vacation, compensatory or gratuitous leave or any other leave during the period of such suspension/
interdiction.

5. MANAGEMENT OF UNUTILISED LEAVE

5.1 Where the suspension and / or interdiction has been lifted and the officer has not attained the age of
compulsory retirement he shall be permitted to proceed on leave previously earned.

5.2 Where the suspension and / or interdiction has been lifted and the officer has attained the age of
compulsory retirement he shall be paid for any unutilised leave based on the applicable
compensation plan.

5.3 Payment for leave referred to in 5.2 will be subject to tax and other statutory deductions.

6. CONCLUSION OF SUSPENSION AND / OR INTERDICTION BY EXONERATED OR NOT
GUILTY DETERMINATION

6.1 Where a suspended and / or interdicted officer is exonerated in respect of criminal charge(s) and/or
disciplinary offence(s)-

(a) The officer’s pay and applicable allowances shall be reinstated to the point at which it was, prior to the
suspension/ interdiction.

(b) The officer’s vacation leave entitlement shall be adjusted to include the period with which he was on
suspension/ interdiction.

(c) The officer’s compensatory days’ entitlement shall be adjusted to include the period with which he was
on suspension/ interdiction.

(d) The officer’s suspension will be lifted with effect of the date of suspension and published by way of a
Departmental Order.

7. CONCLUSION OF SUSPENSION AND / OR INTERDICTION BY EXONERATION BY A GUILTY

DETERMINATION
7.1 An officer convicted of a criminal charge and sentenced to imprisonment without the option of a fine
or convicted of a criminal charge involving dishonesty or fraud shall not receive any pay or allowance after
the date of conviction.
./4


--- page break ---

49/4
7.2 An officer found guilty of a disciplinary charge, and the penalty imposed on him is dismissal,
notwithstanding that he files an application for review within the time specified in the written law, the
officer shall not receive any pay or allowances from the date specified by the Commissioner.
7.3 The Commissioner of Police may direct that an officer convicted of a criminal charge shall cease to
perform the duties of his office immediately.
7.4 No pension, gratuity or other allowance shall be granted in respect of a period of service that is broken
by dismissal or removal.
8. CONCLUSION OF SUSPENSION/ INTERDICTION — PROCEEDINGS UNDETERMINED
Where a matter has not yet been determined, and a suspended and / or interdicted officer:
8.1 Has attained the age of compulsory retirement:
(a) The officer’s suspension will be lifted with effect of the date of suspension and published by way of
a Departmental Order.
(b) The officer’s vacation leave entitlement shall be adjusted to include the period with which he was on
suspension/ interdiction.
(c) The officer’s compensatory days’ entitlement shall be adjusted to include the period with which he
was on suspension/ interdiction.
8.2 Wishes to apply for optional retirement:
(a) Permission in writing must be sought from the Commissioner of Police.
(b) If approval is granted, the suspension/ interdiction will be lifted with effect from the day of such
approval.
(c) The retirement benefits will be processed in accordance with the standard procedures.
(d) The lifting of such suspension with be published by way of a Departmental Order.
8.3 Wishes to resign:
(a) An application must be done in writing to the Commissioner of Police in accordance with Regulation
28 of the Police Service Act Chap 15:01.
(b) If the resignation is accepted, the suspension and / or interdiction will be lifted with effect from the
date of such acceptance.
(c) The lifting of such suspension will be published by way of a Departmental Order.
AS


--- page break ---

49/5

8.4 Is deceased:

(a) The suspension will be lifted with effect of the date of suspension.

(b) This lifting will be published by way of a Departmental Order.

(c) Any retirement benefits owed to the officer will be processed according to the standard procedures.
9. PUBLISHING IN DEPARTMENTAL ORDERS
9.1 Where the Commissioner of Police is required to publish the lifting of a suspension as mentioned above:
(a) This fact shall be published for communication by way of an entry in a Departmental Order.
(b) The entry in the Departmental Order shall outline the Officer’s name, regimental number, rank and their
effective date of the lifting of such suspension.
