eS Police Orders by

PA Commissioner of Police

yen Police Administration Building |

SS Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
_ aie Port of Spain
72 pp mec io Friday 16" April, 2021.
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
ee ee em:
No. 49 Departmental Order PART I- NIL
PART — II

Reproduced hereunder is a Notice from the Police Complaints Authority, dated 31%t March, 2021.
PCA: 01/03/02 — Vol. 22
PCA: 197: -IR-21
Mr. Gary Griffith,
Commissioner of Police,
Commissioner’s Office,
Trinidad and Tobago Police Service,
Police Administration Building,
Corner Sackville and Edward Streets,
Port of Spain.
Dear Commissioner,
Re: _197-IR-21 Complaint made to the Police Complaints Authority.
Reference is made to the matter at caption.
The Police Complaints Authority (“PCA) wishes to bring to your attention an issue which was raised in
a report received by the PCA on March 20, 2021. The report indicated that officers who were
conducting a search for arms and ammunition at a home in Sangre Grande failed to identify themselves
to the members of the household.
The PCA observes that the failure of officers to identify themselves when carrying out a duty such as
conducting a search, even when asked, is a recurring issue being reported to the PCA. The PCA notes
Standing Order No. 7 Paragraph 2 which states that,
“Identification Cards are to be used for the purpose of identifying such persons as bona fide officers of
the Service. The cards shall be shown to members of the public on demand whether in plainclothes or in
uniform”.
Additionally, the PCA notes Departmental Order No. 134 of 2019 on the issuance of Police Badges as
an item of kit in the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service which states at paragraph 8,


--- page break ---

49/2

“Badges together with the accompanying police Identification Cards are to be used for the purpose of
identifying such persons as bona fide officers of the TTPS. A police officer whether in uniform or plain
clothes shall produce his/ her badge upon request of members of the public’.
In light of the forgoing, it is respectfully recommended that police officers be reminded of their obligation
to identify themselves when asked to do so, especially when carrying out their duties, which is captured
under the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service Standing Orders 7 (2) and Departmental Order no. 134 of
2019.
I trusty that this matter will receive your attention.
Yours faithfully.
Sed.
David West
Director
DW/sb.

PART II NIL

aS

Commissioner of Police
