. Police Orders by
2) ; Commissioner of Police
acc olice Administration Building

FA 3 Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets

Yaw Port of Spain
ues Wednesday 28" April, 2021

Tao & TORO PCE Sem (This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
No. 54 Departmental Order PARTS I & III — NIL
PART II
GUIDELINES FOR ACTING APPOINTMENTS
1. Information
The Commissioner of Police is committed to filling all vacancies in the Trinidad and Tobago
Police Service on a permanent basis. Where this is not possible acting appointments will be made
by virtue of the power vested in the Commissioner of Police under section 123A (2)(a) of the
Constitution of Trinidad and Tobago. These appointments are to ensure that there is continuity
and operational stability in the Police Service. In keeping with section 123A (3) of the Constitution
of Trinidad and Tobago the acting appointment to the rank of Inspector of Police up to the rank of
Assistant Commissioner of Police has been assigned to the Deputy Commissioner of Police and
acting appointment from the rank of Corporal of Police up to the rank of Sergeant of Police has
been assigned to the Commanders of the Divisions and Branches by the Commissioner of Police.
Notwithstanding the aforesaid however, the Commissioner of Police reserves the right to appoint
and cease any appointment to act for any member of the Police Service whether it is an officer in
the First Division or Second Division in keeping with the Constitution.
2. Purpose
The purpose of this Order is to define the parameters of acting appointments for officers in the
Trinidad and Tobago Police Service from the rank of Corporal up to the rank of Assistant
Commissioner of Police.
3. Definitions
“Acting appointment” means the temporary appointment of an officer to act in a higher office,
whether that office is vacant or not.
“Appointment” means the appointment of an officer to an office.
“Commander” means for the time being an officer of the rank of Senior
Superintendent/Superintendent in charge of a Division/Branch/Section.
“Deputy Commissioner of Police” means the Deputy Commissioner of Police responsible for
‘Administration and Operational Support’.
“He” includes for the time being reference to the word ‘she’ as well.
“Officer” means a police officer, other than the Commissioner of Police, a Deputy Commissioner
of Police or an Assistant Commissioner of Police in the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service.
“Officer in the First Division” means a police officer who holds an office specified in the First
Schedule of the Police Service Act, Chapter 15:01.
“Officer in the Second Division” means a police officer who holds an office specified in the
Second Schedule of the Police Service Act, Chapter 15:01.
“Police Division” or “Division” means a division determined by the Minister under regulation
35(1) of the Police Service Act, Chapter 15:01.
nated


--- page break ---

) 54/2
4. Scope of Policy
This policy is applicable to all officers from the rank of Constable to the rank of Senior
Superintendent of Police in the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service.
5. Acting Appointments
Acting appointments are not a prelude to substantive appointments.
In the instance where an officer is on an Order of Merit list but has not as yet been promoted the
officer’s seniority on the list shall be the superior basis of his seniority over and above all other
considerations for acting in the rank for which he was assessed.

5 (I) Officers in the First Division

This situation deals with an officer in the First Division and an officer of the rank of Inspector
being considered for an acting position in the First Division as an Assistant Superintendent or
above.

a. An officer appointed shall:

i. asa general rule be the senior officer eligible for such acting appointment;

ii. | assume and discharge the duties and responsibilities of the office to which he is
appointed to act.

b. In making an acting appointment the Deputy Commissioner of Police shall examine
whether the exigencies of the Service would best be served by appointing an officer next
in line of seniority to act other than that senior officer who may be incapable of performing
the duties of the higher grade.

c. Where an acting appointment falls to be made the Deputy Commissioner of Police shall
notify the officers in writing who are eligible for consideration.

d. Where an acting appointment falls to be made but a senior officer is bypassed, he must be
informed of the reasons for being passed over in writing.

e = Eligibility
The Deputy Commissioner of Police can appoint an officer to act in a position in the First Division:

a. Where he is next in line to be appointed to act based on seniority. Seniority is determined
based on the following:

i. From the date the officer was first promoted to the substantive rank he now holds;

ii. | Where it is not possible to determine who was first promoted to the substantive
rank the officer now holds in the first division, then the ranks he was promoted
previously to shall be taken into consideration until a determination is made;

iii. | Where the date of promotion is not sufficient to determine seniority then the date
a person entered into the service shall be taken into consideration;

iv. Where the date of enlistment is not sufficient to determine seniority then the
regimental number shall be the basis for determining seniority;

v. | Where however an officer in the First Division is on an Order of Merit list but has
not as yet been promoted his seniority on the list shall be the superior basis of his
seniority over and above all other considerations mentioned.

inate


--- page break ---

. 54/3

b. Where the post is vacant or where the holder of the post is not available to perform the
duty of the office whether on a permanent or temporary basis.

c. The employment status of the officer shall be taken into consideration (i.e. whether he is
on long leave, continuous sick leave, or study leave). Where the status as mentioned exist,
he must not be considered for an acting appointment until he resumes duty.

5 (ID) Officers in the Second Division

e Inspector of Police acting appointment
This section deals with an officer of the rank of Sergeant being considered for an acting position
as an Inspector of Police.

a. An officer appointed shall:

i. asa general rule be the senior police officer eligible for such acting appointment;
ii. | assume and discharge the duties and responsibilities of the office to which he is
appointed to act.

b. In making an acting appointment the Deputy Commissioner of Police shall examine
whether the exigencies of the Service would best be served by appointing an officer next
in line of seniority to act other than that senior officer who is incapable of performing the
duties of the higher grade.

c. Where an acting appointment falls to be made the Deputy Commissioner of Police shall
notify the officers in writing who are eligible for consideration.

d. Where an acting appointment falls to be made but a senior officer is bypassed, he must be
informed of the reasons for being passed over in writing.

e = Eligibility
The Deputy Commissioner of Police can appoint an officer to act in a position of Inspector of
Police in the second division:

a. Where he is next in line to be appointed to act based on seniority. Seniority is to be

determined based on the following:
i. From the date the officer was first promoted to the substantive rank he now holds
ii. | Where it is not possible to determine who was first promoted to the substantive
rank the officer now holds in the second division, then the ranks he was promoted
previously to shall be taken into consideration until a determination is made;
iii. | Where the date of promotion is not sufficient to determine seniority then the date
a person entered into the service shall be taken into consideration;
iv. Where the date of enlistment is not sufficient to determine seniority then the
regimental number shall be the basis for determining seniority;
v. | Where however an officer in the Second Division is on an Order of Merit list
but has not as yet been promoted his seniority on the list shall be the superior
basis of his seniority over and above all other considerations mentioned.

b. Where the post is vacant or where the holder of the post is not available to perform the

duty of the office whether on a permanent or temporary basis.
./4


--- page break ---

54/4
c. The officer must have been successful in the qualifying examination to the rank of
Inspector.

d. The employment status of the officer shall be taken into consideration (i.e. whether he is
on long leave, continuous sick leave, or study leave). Where the status as mentioned exist,
he must not be considered for an acting appointment until he resumes duty.

e Corporal to Sergeant acting appointment
This situation deals with an officer of the rank of Constable or a Corporal being considered for
an acting position as a Corporal of Police or Sergeant of Police, respectively.

a. An officer appointed shall:

i. as a general rule be the senior officer in the rank eligible for such acting
appointment;

ii. | assume and discharge the duties and responsibilities of the office to which he is
appointed to act.

b. In making an acting appointment the Commander shall examine whether the exigencies of
the Service would best be served by appointing an officer next in line of seniority to act
other than that senior officer who is incapable of performing the duties of the higher grade.

c. Where an acting appointment falls to be made by the Commander in the
Division/Branch/Section to which the officer is attached, he shall notify the said officer in
writing who is eligible for consideration.

d. Where an acting appointment falls to be made but a senior officer is bypassed, he must be
informed of the reasons for being passed over in writing.

e = Eligibility
The Commander of the Division/Branch/Section can appoint an officer to act in a position in the
Second Division as it concerns the rank of Corporal to Sergeant:

a. Where he is next in line to be appointed to act based on seniority. Seniority is determined
based on the following:

i. From the date the officer was first promoted to the substantive rank he now holds

ii. | Where it is not possible to determine who was first promoted to the substantive rank
the officer now holds in the Second Division, then the rank(s) he was promoted
previously to shall be taken into consideration until a determination is made;

iii. | Where the date of promotion is not sufficient to determine seniority then the date
an officer entered into the service shall be taken into consideration;

iv. Where the date of enlistment is not sufficient to determine seniority then the
regimental number shall be the basis for determining seniority;

v. Where however an officer in the Second Division is on an Order of Merit list but
has not as yet been promoted his seniority on the list shall be the superior basis of
his seniority over and above all other considerations mentioned.

b. Where the post is vacant or where the holder of the post is not available to perform the
duty of the office whether on a permanent or temporary basis.

ak


--- page break ---

_— 54/5

c. The officer must have been successful in the qualifying examination to the rank the
acting position is for.

d. The employment status of the officer shall be taken into consideration (i.e. whether he is
on long leave, continuous sick leave, or study leave). Where the status as mentioned
exist, he must not be considered for an acting appointment until he resumes duty.

6. Suspension/Interdiction/Disciplinary/Court Charge

An officer will not be considered for an acting position if the following exist:

a. Where the officer is on suspension from duty in accordance with regulation 152 of the
Police Service Regulations, 2007.

b. Where the officer is on interdiction from duty in accordance with regulation 153 of the
Police Service Regulations, 2007.

c. Where a disciplinary charge for a Category A offence had been preferred against the
officer.

d. Where a criminal charge had been preferred against the officer.

7. Injury Leave

Where an officer proceeds on injury leave whilst acting in a higher officer, this officer should not
cease or be debarred from his acting. He should be paid an allowance equivalent to the acting
allowance he would have received had he not been away from the job on injury leave. The acting
must have existed prior to the officer proceeding on injury leave.

8. Performance Evaluation

a. A performance appraisal report shall be in such form as may be prescribed by the
Commissioner.

b. A performance appraisal report shall be made in respect of an officer who holds an acting
appointment.

c. An employee’s performance will be evaluated based on the functions and responsibilities
of the senior post in which he is acting.

d. A performance appraisal report shall relate to the period of service during the immediately
preceding twelve months.

e. The reporting officer in the performance appraisal report shall assess the job performance
and career potential of each officer.

f. A reporting officer shall, after ensuring that proper communication has occurred with the
officer being assessed concerning that officer’s job performance, record in the performance
appraisal report:

i. | The strengths and weaknesses of that officer’s job performance based on the duties
and standards previously agreed upon with that officer;
ii. | The means, if any, by which the officer’s job performance may be improved or his
job satisfaction;
ili. | The training and developmental needs of that officer within the Service;
iv. The future career potential of that officer and how it may be developed; and
v. | The duties and standards of performance required of that officer for the next year.
.../6


--- page break ---

: 54/6

g. The reporting officer shall ensure that any commendation or award given to the officer
shall be recorded in that officer’s performance appraisal report.

h. The officer being appraised may comment on the performance appraisal report on any
aspect of it, whether it is satisfactory or not, and shall sign it.

i. An officer who is dissatisfied with his performance appraisal report is entitled to make a
written complaint directly to the Commissioner of Police, in the case of an officer acting
in the capacity of an Assistant Commissioner of Police and in all other cases to an officer
of a rank higher than the officer in charge of his Division or Branch.

j. The officer who makes a complaint shall set out the specific nature of his dissatisfaction
and is entitled to be heard by the officer to whom he has made the complaint and who shall
make a final decision on the matter.

9. Increments

a. An officer who is appointed to act in a higher office shall be paid increments in that higher
office and shall continue to draw increments in his substantive office.

b. Where an officer:

i. | Was not earning increments in his substantive office, and the office in which he is
acting has a salary range, he shall receive an increment in the higher salary range
on the anniversary date of his acting appointment;

ii. | Has reached the maximum salary of his substantive office, which maximum may
be equal to or greater than the minimum but less than the maximum of the higher
office, he shall receive an increment in the higher salary range as stated at part 7, a.
above.

c. The grant of an increment however shall be subject to the:

i. Officer acting continuously for a period of twelve months in the higher office; and

ii. Issue of an increment certificate certifying satisfactory service on the prescribed
form by the Commissioner.

d. The period of continuous acting in excess of twelve months in the higher office shall not
be considered to have been broken if the officer is granted normal sick leave entitlement,
and annual leave earned, during the acting appointment.

e. Where an officer has been acting in a higher office for more than twelve months, was not
earning increments in his substantive office and the office in which he is acting has a salary
range, is in receipt of increments in such office, he shall continue to receive such
increments after a break in the acting appointment, but only if:

i. He resumed acting in the same higher office or in a higher office in the same salary
range within six months of the break; or

ii. The break was caused by his proceeding on leave of any type for a period not
exceeding one (1) year and he resumes duty in the higher office within six months
of his resumption of duty.

f. An officer who is transferred from one office to another office that has the same salary
range shall retain the incremental date of the office from which he was transferred.

|


--- page break ---

: 54/7

g. Where an officer has been acting in an office immediately before his appointment to it, his
incremental date shall be the anniversary date of his acting appointment, if it is more
advantageous to him, instead of the date on which his next increment would have become
due in the post from which he was promoted.

10.1 Eligibili

a. Where an officer has been appointed to act in an office higher than his substantive office
and he acts in such higher office, for a period of not less than twelve (12) continuous
months, he shall be eligible to earn annual leave in such higher office.

b. An acting appointment shall not be considered to have been broken during periods of
ordinary sick leave (an officer’s entitlement of sick leave 14 days yearly) and during leave
on casual absences from duty not exceeding seven (7) days leave (working or
compensatory); in such cases acting allowances shall be paid in respect of those periods.

c. Where an officer has acted continuously for a period of twelve (12) months in a higher post
and the officer continues to act in such higher post in excess of twelve (12) months, the
period of acting shall not be considered to have been broken if the officer proceeds on
annual leave earn in such higher office including casual absences or ordinary sick leave
during the acting appointment.

11. Cessation of acting appointment
The acting appointment will be terminated if:
e. The officer in the acting position goes on the following types of leave:
i. | Vacation leave for more than 7 days
ii. Extended sick leave
iii. | Maternity leave
iv. Study leave

f. Where the officer has been suspended from duty in accordance with regulation 152 of the
Police Service Regulations, 2007.

g. Where the officer has been interdicted from duty in accordance with regulation 153 of the
Police Service Regulations, 2007.

h. Where a disciplinary charge for a Category A offence has been preferred against the officer.

i. Where a criminal charge has been preferred against the officer.

j. The performance of the officer in the acting post is not satisfactory.

k. Where the incumbent of the post returns to his/her post.

1. Where promotion has taken place to fill the vacancy on a permanent basis where the officer
had been appointed to on a temporary basis.

m. Where the Commissioner of Police has given such order.

../8


--- page break ---

. 54/8
Where the above situation at parts f. to j. exist, the officer should be given an opportunity to
show cause as to why his acting appointment should not be terminated. The reply of the officer
in these circumstances must be referred to the Commissioner of Police for a determination of
the matter.
12. General
The system outlined in this order is defined to ensure that there is no doubt as to the way in
which acting appointments are made as it concerns the rank of Corporal of Police up to the
rank of Assistant Commissioner of Police. Acting appointments to the ranks of Commissioner
of Police and Deputy Commissioner of Police, are under the purview of the Police Service
Commission and as such, are not within the ambit of this order. It should be noted that this
order merely articulates a policy that has been in existence for some time in the past.
oe
