Police Orders by Mrs. Erla Christopher
Commissioner of Police
Police Administration Building
ie 7 wal Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
ee Port of Spain
"Pemorecr ars So Thursday 11" April, 2024
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian employees of
the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
No. 55 Departmental Order PARTI & II —NIL
PART II
GUIDELINES FOR OPERATION OF STATION COUNCILS

1. Introduction

In accordance with our vision, “To make every place in Trinidad and Tobago safe”, the Trinidad
and Tobago Police Service (TTPS) is seeking to work in synergy with the public through a structured
mechanism, known as the Station Council. This approach is in keeping with the organization’s 2022-
2024 Strategic Plan, themed “Reaffirming our Resilience, Shared Purpose and Values in an era
of Exponential Change,” and is grounded specifically within Strategic Priority Area #1 Community
Partnerships, but also contributes to Strategic Priority Area #2, Public Safety, as outlined in the
Operating Plan 2024.

The idea of the Police Station Council is not new, but has been practiced by the TTPS for a number
of years. This approach focuses on developing relationships, building trust and collaborating with
members of the community in an effort to reduce crime and criminality through varied strategies
such as “Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design” (CPTED) and the formulation of
“Neighbourhood Watch Groups.” It also adopts the policing philosophy of Sir Robert Peele and his
nine principles that address issues such as professionalism, police legitimacy, partnership and public
support among others.

Our organization recognizes that we cannot do it alone, because “Crime Prevention is Everyone’s
Business.” Therefore, establishing and maintaining mutual trust and positive community
engagement through a structured Police Station Council will encourage a symbiotic relationship
between the police and public. This will enhance our crime fighting capabilities and assist in
bringing perpetrators to justice.

2. Brief History

The Station Council concept has been in existence for over twenty years in the TTPS. Its intention
was connecting the community with the Police in each district. The expectation was that better
communication and sharing of concerns would enable every arm of the community to contribute to
the fight against crime that will result in stronger and safer communities and police districts.

wold


--- page break ---

55/2
The first documented Police Station Council concept emerged in 2001, with early champions
including retired Inspector Chunilal Bedasie, who utilized a strategic approach that involved regular
meetings of stakeholders within the district to jointly address issues related to crime and safety. This
concept then became a formula in establishing Police Station Councils within every Police Station
District.
3. Intention
The intention of this Departmental Order is to establish and standardize the operational procedures
of Police Station Council in every Police Station District.
4. Definitions

i. Police Station Council (PSC) - A formal collaborative structure between the Police
and Community, to address and find solutions for the challenges within the Station
District.

ii. Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED) —- A strategic
approach in building, landscaping, lighting and maintaining the environment to
eliminate or minimize criminal activities and improve safety.

iii. Neighbourhood Watch Group (NWG) — An organized police registered community
group devoted to crime prevention within its neighbourhood.

iv. Non-functional Police Station Council —a Police Station Council that has not held a
meeting with a quorum for 3 consecutive months.

5. Objectives
The overall objective of the Police Station Council is to make Trinidad and Tobago a safer place. Its
specific objectives are to:

i. Establish an official forum where police and community can work together in the fight
against crime.

ii. Enable and encourage structured community participation to resolve communal
issues.

iii. Develop stakeholder partnerships between the police and the community in
accordance with the TTPS Strategic priorities.

iv. Initiate change through effective communication.

v. Undertake collaborative crime prevention initiatives.

../3


--- page break ---

55/3
6. Expected Outcomes
i. Increased public confidence.
ii. Improved police legitimacy.
iii.  Legitimized Neighbourhood Watch Groups through the Police Station Council.
iv. Crime reduction, particularly in communities adversely affected.
v. Prevention of crime
vi. Increased detection of crime.
vii. | Reduction in the fear of crime.
vill. A safer Trinidad and Tobago.
7. Administrative Structure
Deputy Commissioner of Police, “Operations” (DCP “O”) — shall have overall responsibility for
the operations of Police Station Council and the registration of neighbourhood watch groups in all
divisions.
Regional Assistant Commissioner of Police (ACP) - shall have executive oversight of the
Divisional Commanders under their command in relation to Police Station Councils and the
registration of Neighbourhood Watch Groups. Regional ACPs are to ensure that Police Station
Council returns are submitted to Deputy Commissioner of Police, “Operations” within fourteen (14)
days of the meeting date. Additionally, Regional ACPs are to ensure that quarterly reports on the
projects and initiatives undertaken by the Police Station Council are submitted to Deputy
Commissioner of Police, “Operations” within ten (10) days of receipt from their divisional
commanders.
Divisional Commanders — Senior Superintendents in charge of the Divisions shall submit a Police
Station Council Return to their Regional Assistant Commissioner of Police within seven (7) days
of the Police Station Council meeting. Additionally, a quarterly report on the projects and initiatives
undertaken by the Police Station Council shall be submitted to the Regional Assistant Commissioner
of Police within five (5) days of the next quarter. The Divisional Commanders are to ensure that
each station district under his/her command maintain a functional Police Station Council, with a
minimum of ten (10) meetings a year.
Inspector or SDO i/c - will be responsible for:
i. Forming and chairing the Police Station Council where the public and police can
collaborate to solve crime and other community issues.
ii. Creating and maintaining a directory of community groups and other stakeholders and
resource persons within the station district.
iii. Creating and maintaining a Police Station Council file for presentation during
quarterly inspections.
./4


--- page break ---

55/4

iv. Networking with community groups within the station district to be part of the Police

Station Council.
v. Organizing monthly Police Station Council meetings.

vi. Presiding over the annual Police Station Council Election of President, Vice President
and Assistant Secretary.

vii. Submitting the results of the elections to Senior Superintendent of the Division within
seven (7) days of the election.

viii. Submitting minutes to Senior Superintendent of the Division within seven (7) days of
the meeting indicating attendance, action taken in relation to issues raised, proposal/s
made and timelines given.

ix. Monitoring and reporting on CPTED projects on the prescribed forms (see Appendix
I& Ip
x. Addressing all police related matters that come to his/her attention during the Police
Station Council meeting.
xi. Referring non related police matters to the relevant authority for action.
xii. Providing a status report at the next meeting.
xiii. | Recommending the registration of Neighbourhood Watch Groups.
xiv. Strengthening community partnership in keeping with TTPS Strategic Priorities.
Upon a change of SDO i/c these duties shall be handed over with accompanying documentation in
accordance with Standing Orders 9 and 52.
Community Policing Officer/Customer Service Representative:
i. Performs duty as Secretary/ Public Relations Officer to the Police Station Council.
ii. Assists SDO i/e with the planning and coordination of Police Station Council
meetings.
ili. Assists with networking and fostering good community relationships.
iv. Assists in the formation of Neighbourhood Watch Groups approved by the Deputy
Commissioner of Police, “Operations”.
Police Station Council Structure:
i. Chairperson — Inspector or Second Division Officer in charge (SDO i/c) of the
relevant Police Station, ex officio commander of the Police Station Council.
ii. Vice Chairperson — 2nd in Command of Police Station Council.
iii. Secretary —Community Policing Officer or an officer chosen by SDO i/c who will be
responsible for recording and submitting return of the meeting/s.
iv. Public Relations Officer — Police Officer who promotes the Police Station Council
strategy generally, as well as the activities it undertakes.
../5


--- page break ---

55/5
v. President - Community group representative and chief liaison between community
and police.
vi. Vice President — Community group representative who acts as President in their
absence.
vii. Assistant Secretary — a designated member of the community who assists the
Secretary and acts as Secretary in their absence.

vili. The Police Station Council will include representatives from the station district, such
as churches, schools, businesses, government agencies, regional corporations, non-
governmental organizations, sporting organizations and other stakeholder groups
serving the station’s geographic area.

Responsibilities of the Police Station Council:
The primary responsibility of the Police Station Council is to strengthen the relationship between
police and the public. In turn, it also provides an atmosphere for persons to comfortably express
their concerns and share ideas on community empowerment. Other responsibilities include:
1. Being the medium for the harmonious relationship between the community and the
police.
2. Identifying community needs and approaches in an effort to address same.
3. Collaborating and devising strategies to enhance social control and reduce crime and
lawlessness in communities within the station district.
4. Organizing initiatives to enhance the quality of life of persons in the community,
including specific CPTED projects.
5. Advising on community matters inclusive of the forming of Neighbourhood Watch
Groups.
6. Organizing community social activities and events that will foster cohesion and
positive community spirit.
7. Providing the avenue where critical information can be passed on to the police for a
safe and secure community.
8. Serving as a catalyst for excellent service between the police and community.
Although the Police Station Council may undertake projects which require external assistance, the
acceptance of financial contributions is strictly prohibited; however, contributions in-kind, such as
donated items, professional advice or skilled labour from community stakeholders are welcome.
Such support shall be brought to the attention of the Deputy Commissioner of Police, “Operations”
via project reports identifying the stakeholders and their input.
..-/6


--- page break ---

55/6
8. General
The establishment of the Police Station Council will improve the relationship with the public and the police
thereby reducing crime and fear of crime and social disorder. Consequently, it is anticipated this will also
facilitate increased business investments, a stronger economy and moreover a safer Trinidad and Tobago
for all citizens and residents.
Commissioner of Police


--- page break ---

Stronger Relationship
Trust
Trust
Information/
Collaboration |
Information/
Collaboration
Intelligence/ Evidence _ |
Intelligence/ Evidence
gathering
Crime solving/
Prevention
Reduction in crime and
Safer Trinidad & Tobago


--- page break ---

Appendix I
CPTED PROJECT PROPOSAL
Division/Section: _
1. Name of Project:
2. Start date: End date:
Month Day Year Month Day Year
3. Which CPTED principles will this Project utilize?
O Natural Surveillance CJ) Territorial reinforcement
C Access Control 0 Maintenance
4. Contact Information for persons directly responsible for the Project:
feontsananes [a] —SsS—C*id Sd
‘contacnombess [uf Cid PCS
5. Where will the project be implemented?
6. What is the problem/issue that this Project is intended to address?
7. What is the overall objective of this Project?
8. Who is this Project targeting? (e.g. secondary school students, high risk youth, etc.)


--- page break ---

9. Stakeholders involved:
ee
Oe
a
10. Please describe the activities to be undertaken during this Project:
@ oo
@)
(iii) i
(iv)
(Vv)
(vi)
11. What are the measurable results expected from this Project?
Outputs:
GQ)
Gi)
(iii)
(iv)
Outcomes:
GQ oo
(i)
(iii) a
dd/ mnm/ yyyy
[Please use additional sheets if necessary]


--- page break ---

Appendix II
CPTED PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT
Division/Section:
1. Name of Project:
2. Start date: End date:
Month Day Year Month Day Year
3. Which CPTED principles has this Project utilized?
Ci Natural Surveillance 0 Territorial reinforcement
Oi Access Control C Maintenance
4. Contact Information for persons directly responsible for the Project:
[consanemes [al —Sss—s—Cid SSCS
cone numbers [uf *d |
5. Where was the project implemented?
6. What was the problem/issue that this Project was intended to address?
7. Project description:
8. Who were the main beneficiaries of this Project?


--- page break ---

9. Stakeholders involved:

Stakeholder Description of involvement/ contribution

10. Please describe the activities undertaken for this project:
CG)
a
(iii) OT
(iv)
(VY)
(vi)

11. Challenges:
Ge
iy
(iii)

12. What are the measurable results achieved to date? (all results identified in the proposal should be

addressed and any unanticipated results should also be included)

Outputs:
Go
Gi)
(ili) a
(iv)
Outcomes:
GQ)
Gi)
it)

13. Future plans:

14, Submitted by: Date:

dd/inmm/ yyyy


--- page break ---

15. Verified by [A]: Date:
dd/ nunm/ yyyy
Verified by [B]: Date:
dd/ mmin/ yyyy
[Please use additional sheets to support results reported] —_
