Police Orders by
wx Commissioner of Police
(=) Police Ss ne
: ‘ Cor. Edwar ackville Streets
ey Port of Spain
ues Monday 7" June, 2021
=e (This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian
a employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
No.65 Departmental Order PART I— NIL
PART II
Establishment of the Community Operational Policing Section
1. INTRODUCTION
Community Policing is an integral aspect of contemporary policing. It promotes organizational
strategies that support the systemic use of partnership and problem solving techniques. It
proactively addresses the immediate conditions that contribute to the rise of public safety issues
such as crime, social disorder and fear of crime.
It focuses on developing relationships whilst working closely with members of the community.
It’s a proactive, collaborative effort between the public and the police in an attempt to keep
communities safe -Trojanowicz and Bucqeroux (1992) have proffered the following definition:
“Community Policing is a philosophy and an organizational strategy that promotes new
partnership between people and police. It is based on the premise that both the police and the
community must work together to identify, prioritize, and solve contemporary problems such as
crime, drugs, fear of crime, social and physical disorder and overall neighbourhood decay, with
the goal of improving the overall quality of life.”
—Bertus Ferreira
The TTPS, through its Community Relations entity has the mandate to oversee and execute a
number of Community oriented programs in keeping with the philosophy stated above. The
establishing and maintaining of mutual trust through community engagement will encourage
persons to provide creditable information to the Community Policing Officers, with the aim of
assisting in crime prevention and investigative strategies. However, the existing management
structure or arrangement is not designed to accommodate this initiative.
2. BACKGROUND
During the period of 1996 to 2002, Community Policing was placed under its very own Section
Head, with Police Officers being assigned throughout the Divisions. The philosophy in the TTPS
at the time emphasized the value in forging a relationship, developing a partnership and building
trust between the community and the Police, to identify problems and implement crime fighting
strategies.
By 2002, the organization identified the need to have a different approach to Community Policing
and instead of a centralized head; it was felt that the concept should be embraced by all police
officers instead of a selective few. In this regard, the nine Divisional Commanders were given the
mandate to infuse this philosophical approach to policing in their day to day operations, and an
Inspector of Police was assigned as the head of the Division’s Community Policing Unit. This
concept has been in existence to date with minimal success by the organization, and even less
noticeable by the general public.


--- page break ---

65/2
3. ESTABLISHMENT
The Community Operational Policing Section (COPS) shall be established within the service
with effect from Monday 7" December, 2020. The main office would be located at the Community
Relations Riverside Plaza, Besson Street, Port of Spain which shall be its base of operation,
however for operational purposes Community Oriented Policing Units will be placed in each of
the nine Police Divisions.
4. INTENTION
The 2020 to 2025 Community Policing Plan intention to fulfil the Trinidad and Tobago Police
Service Strategic Plan 2019 — 2021 and to exemplify its goal by restructuring the existing
arrangement of Community Policing within the Organisation. The aim is to re-establish the
Community Oriented Policing philosophy to its former mores— under one head, where the TTPS
Community Relations — inclusive of the Tourism Oriented Patrol Section (TOPS), Customer
Service Unit and the Divisional Community Oriented Policing (DCOP) Units are fused. This
reorganizing of Community Oriented Policing will have a meagre impact on the organizational
structure of the TTPS, with the expectation that a systematic approach be put in place for the
general operations of the organization.
The intention of this order is to outline the establishment of the COPS. The formation of the Unit
is designed to fulfil the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service strategic plan and to exemplifies the
goal of making the Service a world-class establishment in keeping with the TTPS strategic plan
for 2019-2021. The order is also designed to make known to the Police Service, as a whole that
the Community Oriented Policing Section (COPS) is part of the landscape of the organisation.
OBJECTIVES
It should be noted that the objectives of the Community Oriented Policing Plan are rooted in the
Policing Principles and ideologies of Sir Robert Peele which speaks to crime prevention, police
legitimacy, professionalism, building partnerships and earning public support.

e Establish a strata headed by a Commander.

e Establish roles and functions of the Community Officers within the organization.

e Enhance the philosophy of Community Oriented Policing.

e To have an active police presence within the community.

e Enhance Community Policing module in the Police Academy curriculum.

e Provide training and certification in Community Oriented Policing for all officers.

e Establish and maintain a partnership with all sectors of our Community.

e To improve moral attributes and attitudes whilst fostering a relationship between the public
and the police in an effort to reduce the fear of crime and improve the quality of life in the
communities.

e Enhance and maintain the growth and development of police youth clubs within divisions.

e Place Customer Service Unit and Tourism Oriented Policing Section under the
command of Head Community Relations.

e Provide a safe haven for local and foreign visitors to Trinidad and Tobago.

e Provide for an avenue through international and local Community Relations forums.

e To restore the public confidence and trust in the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service
(TTPS).

aa


--- page break ---

65/3
With regards to Tourism Oriented Policing Section in Tobago, the aims and objectives will
be to:
1. Empower and strengthen the capacity of the community and visitors to be
responsible for their personal safety.
2. Encourage visitors and citizens to familiarize themselves with the station district and
emergency services numbers.
3. Provide an environment that is safe and secure for residents and visitors. Thus,
eliminating negative advisories from the targeted source market.
4. Adopt best practices in Tourism Security in Tobago.
5. Encourage Tourism Security safety in communities
6. Collaborate with the Tourism Department and other stakeholders to sensitize visitors
about safety.
7. Ensure that legislations are enforced and adhered.
8. Engage the public through sensitization and public awareness programs about safety
which will lead to a more informed public.
5. ADMINISTRATIVE STRUCTURE
The Deputy Commissioner of Police, “Administration and Operational Support” shall have overall
responsibility for operations of the Community Oriented Policing Section (COPS), however, the
head of the COPS shall fall under the administrative directive of the Assistant Commissioner of
Police, “Tactical Support” and Commanded by an officer who shall be of the rank of a Senior
Superintendent of Police. the functions of the Community Relations be merged with the various
Units/Sections namely: Divisional Community Police, Customer Service Representatives, and
Tourism Oriented Policing, to establish the Community Oriented Policing (COP) Section. This
Section shall be the Headquarters for the aforementioned Units/Sections within the Trinidad and
Tobago Police Service.
With the implementation of this Community Oriented Policing Section (COPS) Plan, the Assistant
Commissioner, ‘Tactical Support’ shall have executive oversight, whereby the Senior
Superintendent shall have full command of this Section.
Hereunder is the proposed staff for the Community Oriented Policing Section:
HEADQUARTERS:
1. Senior Superintendent of Police [01]
2. Superintendent [01]
3. Assistant Superintendent [03]
4. Inspector [02]
5. Sergeant [03]
6. Corporal [03]
7. Constable [12]
8. Legal Officer [01]
9. Coordinator of Programs and Planning [01]
10. Program Officer [01]
11. Program Assistant [03]
12. Administrative Assistant [01]
13. Office Assistant [01]
./4


--- page break ---

65/4

DIVISIONAL COMMUNITY POLICING UNITS:

1. Inspector [O01]

2. Sergeant [02]

3. Corporal [05]

4. Constable [20]

5. Office Assistant [01]

TOURISM ORIENTED PATROL SECTION (TOPS) TOBAGO

1. Sergeant [01]

2. Corporal [03]

3. Constables [20]

4. Office Assistant [01]

CUSTOMER SERVICE REPRESENTATIVE UNIT (CSRU)

5. Corporal [09]

6. Constables [55]

7. Office Assistant [01]
Legal Officer — A Legal Officer be assigned to the Community Policing Branch, to treat with
concerns as it relates to community policing directives and activities.
Proposed Strength
Ep ee Pe eee eee
Proposed Civilian Strength

Coordinator of Programme Officer | Administrative Office Total

Programmes & Assistant Assistant

Planning
A ee Se ee
Officers in-charge of Divisions, Branch, Sections and Units (COMMANDERS), will liaise with
the Senior Superintendent who in turn will direct the Inspector “Community Policing” within the
respective Division. Sergeant responsible for TOPS, Tobago, will report to the Inspector
Community Relations Tobago Division and the Customer Service Representative shall report
through the Sergeant and Inspector Community Relations.
is


--- page break ---

65/5
Divisional Distribution of Strength

e A strength at the Divisional Office to accommodate the mandate of the Divisional needs

e A strength of one COP Officer to be attached to each station district within the Division

e A strength of six Customer Service Representatives at each Division to be assigned to
station district by the ‘ASP ‘based on needs.

e With Tobago Division being the main focus of the Tourism Oriented Policing Section
(TOPS) initiative it is the intention to extend TOPS in the various Divisions by having one
officer out of COPS assigned to each Division.

e A strength of at least two Police Officers with Youth Club experience per Division.

ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

In establishing “The New Normal” as indicated in the TTPS Strategic Plan 2019 to 2021, the
Community Oriented Policing Section (COPS) will be responsible for drafting policies,
implementing and the overseeing of community Police related activities throughout the nine
Divisions in Trinidad and Tobago, in accordance with the organization’s goals and the 2020 to
2025 Community Police Plan.

Some of these functions include:

e Continued development, implementation, review and analysis of community policing
policies.

e The Welfare of Police Officers, Police Retirees and their respective families.

e Conduct of Police Funerals.

e The Management of Police Youth Clubs and related activities and other National Youth
Enhancement Programs.

e Manage the operations of the Tourism Oriented Policing Section and Customer Service
Unit.

e Design, implement or coordinate School Intervention and other Government Assisted
Youth Programs.

e Coordination of Town and Station council meetings and other Initiatives such as:

Coffee with a Cop

National Community Day

Child Meets Cop — Cop for a day
Cop Meets Community

e Designing and promoting Community driven anti-crime strategies/interventions through
Police Educational Caravans or other such initiatives.

e Provide appropriate training for Community Oriented Policing personnel, Liaison
Officers and PYC leaders.

e Establish and maintain relationships with Governmental and Non-Governmental Agencies,
including Internal and External stake holders.

e Consulting with the Corporate Communication so that information can be disseminated in
an effective and efficient manner.

e Monitor and evaluate the operations and management of the Community Policing Units
and Liaison Officers.

e Consult and advise Divisional Commanders on Community Policing initiatives.

.../6


--- page break ---

65/6

e Collect and evaluate data on Community Policing events and activities.

e Promote Community Policing initiatives throughout the Police Service.

e Assist in the implementation of Community and Youth Programs through the Crime

Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED) concept.
e To improve the relationship between the public and the police.
e Providing an environment where the public can be comfortable in disclosing nefarious
activities in their communities.
e Making communities safer.
I. MINIMUM EXPERIENCE AND TRAINING
The officer should have a minimum of five (5) years’ experience as a Police Officer.
A Bachelors Certificate in Criminology, Social Work, Sociology, Psychology as well as a
Certificate in Microsoft Office suite or a similar program will be an asset.
II. GENERAL

The establishment of the Unit will enhance the delivery of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service
as well as its image. As a result of the focus of the Unit it will be mainly staffed by Police Officers
and ably supported by civilian staff to

e assist in streamlining and aggressively pursuing community Policing initiatives

e provide the necessary support in a focused, proactive policing environment

e generate greater support from stakeholders with a commitment to reduce crime.
Civilian supporting staff to include:

a. Coordinator of Program and Planning.

b. Program Officer

ec. Program Assistants (Three)

d. Administrative Assistant

e. Office Assistants (Eleven)

PART III — NIL
Commissioner of Police
