a
j ES

C2) Police Orders by

BR Commissioner of Police

RNA Police Administration Building

2a Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
4 = Port of Spain
PROTEC a0 SO P
——— Monday 14" June, 2021.
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian employees of
the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
SE Se ae ee a Et ee
No. 68 Departmental Order PARTS | & HI-NIL
PART I
Reproduced hereunder is a Notification from The Ministry of National Security
File No: NS/DNA: 108/5/1 Vol. I
Mr. Gary Griffith
Commissioner of Police
Police Administration Building
Corner Edward and Sackville Streets
Port of Spain
Dear Commissioner,
Forms used in the operationalization of the Administration of Justice (Deoxyribonucleic Acid) Act,
Chapter 5:34 and DNA Regulations.
I refer to the captioned subject.
As you may be aware, the National Forensic DNA Databank (NFDD) was established in January 2017 and
is managed by the DNA Custodian Unit. The NFDD is mandated to store and compare DNA profiles from
known individuals and crime scene material in order to find matches, familial associations and
contamination.
The Administration of Justice (Deoxyribonucleic Acid) Act, Chapter 5:34 (Act 5 of 2012) hereinafter
referred to as the DNA Act as well as the DNA Regulations (2018) include specific Forms which must be
completed when:
i. Intimate and non-intimate samples are collected from known individuals to generate DNA profiles
for NFDD entry;
Il. Authorized persons request a search or disclosure of DNA profiles stored in the NFDD;
iii. Police Officers record the taking of crime scene material.
DNA Act Second Schedule Forms
According to the Second Schedule of the DNA Act, the Forms 1, 1A, 2, 4 and 6 must be completed in
duplicate when samples are being collected from known individuals by Police Officers or Qualified
Persons (i.e. registered Medical Practitioners and Nurses).
Enclosed are copies of these Forms to be replicated and disseminated to all Police Stations where trained
Police Officers shall be actively collecting non-intimate samples from volunteers, suspects, detainees,
accused, etc.
ale


--- page break ---

cr
we ' - ‘
68/2

DNA Regulations Form 1- Search Request
According to DNA Regulations 15(2), 15(3) and 15(9), the following persons/ agencies may request the
DNA Custodian Manager to search the NFDD using a specific Search Request Form:

i. The Commissioner of Police

il. An Investigating Officer in the course of a criminal investigation or proceeding; and

ill. The Central Authority

Authorised persons requesting a search of the NFDD must also submit a NFDD DNA Profile Search
Form along with the aforementioned Search Request Form. Enclosed are copies of the Search Request
Form (Schedule 1, Form 1 of DNA Regulations) and the NFDD DNA Profile Search Form (s) to be
replicated and disseminated to all Police Stations. Additionally, an investigating Officer or the Central
Authority must submit every search request with official written endorsement from the Commissioner of
Police, Central Authority or the Attorney General.
DNA Regulation Form 2 — Disclosure Request
According to DNA Regulation 28(2), the following persons/agencies may request the DNA Custodian
Manager to disclose information on the NFDD using a specific Disclosure Request Form:

fb A Police Officer acting in the course of a criminal investigation or proceeding;

ite A person from whom a sample was taken or his representative; or

ili. A government agency or an educational institute approved by the Minister for the sole purpose of

research, provided that no readily identifiable personal information is disclosed.

Enclosed are copies of the Disclosure Request Form (Schedule 1, Form 2 of the DNA Regulations) to
be replicated and disseminated to all Police Stations. An authorized person or agency must submit this
disclosure request with official written endorsement from the Commissioner of Police, the Attorney
General, the Central Authority or the Court.

DNA Regulation Form 3 — Crime Scene Register

According to DNA Regulation 30, the Commissioner of Police shall cause a register (Crime Scene
Register) to be created and maintained for the purpose of recording the information set out in Schedule 4
(of DNA Regulations) in relation to crime scene material that is collected and submitted for the purpose
of generating a DNA profile in accordance with the DNA Act.

Enclosed are copies of the Crime Scene Register (Schedule 1, Form 3 of the DNA Regulations) to be
replicated and disseminated to all Police Stations.

All aforementioned forms are available at the Government Printer with the exception of the NFDD DNA
Profile Search Form which is an internal NFDD document.

Please have your relevant officer contact Ms. Shamiso Mc Shine, the Deputy DNA Custodian
Manager, at (868) 487-2909 or email smeshine@mns.gov.tt should you require further information.
Your kind cooperation is greatly appreciated.

Nataki Atiba-Dilchan

Permanent Secretary (Ag.)

Commissioner of Police
