Ce) Police Orders by Mrs Erla Christopher
a Ae Commissioner of Police
Police Administration Building
Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
Pemorecr as Monday 29" April, 2024
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian employees of
the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
No. 70 Departmental Order PARTI & Ul —NIL
PART II
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE SECRETARIAT

Recently, stakeholders have harshly criticized officers of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service
for what might be considered unprofessional, discourteous, inept, inefficient, and disrespectful
behaviour and a general disregard for the policy enunciated at Departmental Order 139 of 2008
“Treatment of Reports made at Station by members of the public”.
Concerns over improper behaviour and improper use of public resources have always been areas of
concern. In an attempt to repair the organization’s reputation and win back the trust and confidence
of our stakeholders, this order aims to coordinate and foster relationships with internal and external
agencies.
Asa result, The Commissioner's Secretariat will be established for this purpose. (henceforth referred
to as "The Secretariat")
ADMINISTRATION
"The Secretariat" shall be under the direct supervision of the Commissioner of Police and will
provide a concise overview of the strategies and policies the Commissioner of Police intends to
implement in leading and managing members of the Service.
The established strength of The Secretariat shall consist as follows-:

Senior Superintendent Assistant Inspector Sergeant | Corporal | Constable | Total

Superintendent Superintendent
ee ee ee ee ee
../2


--- page break ---

70/2

GENERAL
"The Secretariat" has the authority to hire occasionally, albeit temporarily other specialists as needed
to augment current projects or provide the necessary skills from both inside and outside the Service.
This however, must be done in accordance with the established protocols.
CONCLUSION
It is incontestably obvious that the public's complete cooperation and participation are necessary for
the transformation of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service. We can all agree that, with
cooperation, there are some obstacles which are manageable. But as we alter our business practices,
let us maintain "Service to our Community" as our guiding principle. It should also be highlighted
that Real service requires adding honesty and integrity—qualities that are neither measurable or able
to be purchased, and which is needed in our drive to restore the public's trust and confidence in the
Trinidad and Tobago Police Service.

tual of Police
