nee Police Orders by
ew Commissioner of Police
5 Poiice Administration Building
snd & TOGO PLE Sem Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
72 pgp ao Port of Spain
WITH PRIDE é
Monday 21% June, 2021.
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian employees of
the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
No. 71 Departmental Order PARTS | & III — NIL
PART II
Departmental Order No. 137 dated 04.09.2020 is amended by inserting the undermentioned paragraphs:

Paragraph 9
9. RETIREMENT BENEFITS
9.1 Where an officer has been placed on suspension or interdiction and there is no determination of guilt in
respect of the allegations made against the officer, the officer’s imminent retirement shall be acknowledged
by the Commissioner of Police and published by way of Departmental Order six (6) months prior to the
date that the officer attains the compulsory age of retirement, and the processing of his retirement benefits
shall commence.
9.2 Where an officer who was placed on suspension or interdiction, and no determination as to his guilt has
been made in respect of the allegations against him attains the age of retirement, he shall transition
immediately without lifting of the said suspension or interdiction and his retirement shall be published by
way of Departmental Order.
9.3 Pursuant to 8.3 and 8.4, where an officer attains the age of retirement and the order of suspension or
interdiction is not listed, the relevant department (s) shall approve the cessation of payment of the officer’s
salary from the effective date of his retirement and the Officer’s retirement benefits shall be dispensed
accordingly.
9.4 Where an officer is placed on suspension/interdiction and no determination has been made in respect
of his guilt when he attains the age of retirement, this policy shall apply regardless of whether the officer is
retiring by way of attaining the compulsory age of retirenfent, or by way of exercising his option to retire
pursuant to Section 74 of the Police Service Act.
10. CONCLUSION
Suspension and interdiction form part of the disciplinary process and may be required in the interest of
justice, for the public interest and for the reputation of thé Police Service. However, an officer should not
be unduly prejudiced by these procedures, especially when there is no finding of guilt against him. The
above policy is intended to serve as a guideline which governs the treatment of suspended and interdicted
officers. Further to this with the requisite adherence, it should strike a balance between the abovementioned
interest and the interest of such officers.

Commissioner of Potice..:
