Police Orders by
ts Commissioner of Police
bec Police Administration Building
aR Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
RMA Port of Spain
or Wednesday 30 June, 2021
Prrorecr ae so (This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
5 a co ll le eT near Eee ee
No. 79 Departmental Order PART I - NIL
PARTI .
NOTICE
COSTAATT Applications for: Associate Science Degree in Management Studies for the
INVITATION Protective Services
The College of Science Technology and Applied Arts of Trinidad and Tobago
(COSTAATT), is inviting applications from Police Officers of the Trinidad and
Tobago Police Service for the Associate Science Degree in Management Studies for
the Protective Services.
This programme exposes participants to managerial concepts both in theory and
practice, as well as other critical skills such as communication, ethics, information
technology and law. These are all designed to enhance their skills and allow for
greater efficiency, which today is the focal point in the transformation of the public
sector. This will also allow successful participants to respond effectively as change
agents upon their return to the organization.
This full-time programme will be delivered in two (2) years, twenty-four (24)
calendar months and this years’ intake will begin on 10" October, 2021, with an
anticipated end date in August, 2023. The classes for this programme will be
fully online due to the ongoing pandemic.
Interested personne: of the rank of Assistant Superintendent of Police, Inspector of
Police and Sergeant of Police are required to complete the prescribed COSTAATT
registration forms along with their updated Curriculum Vitae which must be
forwarded through their respective Heads of Divisions/Sections/Branches/Units to
reach the Deputy Commissioner of Police ‘Administration’ no later than igi
August, 2021. Persons are also required to submit in writing in no more than 1000
words, their justification for applying to do this programme and how undertaking
this programme will benefit both themselves and the organization.
Registration forms are available at the Human Resource Branch (Second Floor)
Training Section, Administration Building, Corner Edward and Sackville Streets, Port
of Spain, COSTAATT’s website and T.T.P.S Portal.
poli
7 ;


--- page break ---

79/2
COSTAATT Completed COSTAATT forms must be accompanied with the following
INVITATION documents: -
Cont. I. Certified Copy of Birth Certificate
Il. Certified Copy of National Identification Card
Ill. Certificate of Academic Qualifications
IV. Recent Performance Appraisal
Vv. Updated Curriculum Vitae
Police Officers who are holders of Masters, First Degree and/or an Associate Degree
from a recognized University are not eligible to apply for this programme.
PART II - NIL
Commissioner of Police
