. as ty, i;
a. Police Orders by
Yaw Commissioner of Police
ss OK : Police Administration Building
7 ora waeesPaue Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
7 out Port of Spain
PROTECT AND
WITH PRIDE Monday 5" July, 2021.
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian employees of
the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
No. 81] Departmental Order PART I&III-NIL
PART - Il
Windscreen and Window Tint Policy
These Regulations came into operation on the 3rd day of August, 2020.

1. (1) A person shall not cause or permit a vehicle to be used, or drive or have charge of a
vehicle, upon any road where a windscreen or window of the vehicle is composed of, coated
or covered by, or treated or darkened with, any material, overlay or other product, that has the
effect of making the windscreen or window non-transparent or reducing the visible light
transmittance of the windscreen or window unless—

(a) the front windscreen has a visible light transmittance of at least seventy percent;
(b) each front window, including any side wing and side window, on either side and
forward of the vertical plane immediately behind the driver’s seatback in its rearmost
and upright position, has a visible light transmittance of at least thirty-five percent; and
(c) each rear window, including any side window behind the front window and the rear
windscreen, has a visible light transmittance.of at least twenty percent
(2) Sub regulation (1) does not apply where the material on the windscreen or window was
installed by the manufacturer of the vehicle and approved by the Licensing Authority.
(3) Notwithstanding sub regulation (1), the front windscreen of a vehicle may have affixed to
its top, along its width and in such a position as not to interfere with the vision of either the
driver, or a passenger carried in the front seat, a band of material or an anti-glare band overlay
which—
(a) (i) measures in width from the top of the windscreen, no more than fifteen centimetres
or six inches; or
(ii) in the case of a vehicle above Class 3, covers an area above the highest point of the
windscreen that is swept by a windscreen wiper; and
(b) which has a visible light transmittance of at least thirty-five percent.
(4) A person who contravenes sub regulation (1) commits a traffic violation and is liable to a
fine of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
e/a


--- page break ---

: 81/2
5. (i) A person shall not cause or permit a vehicle to be used, or drive or have charge ofa
vehicle, on any road, if a windscreen or window of the vehicle is composed of, coated or
covered by, or treated with, any material, overlay or product, that has the effect of making the
windscreen or window appear to have a metallic, reflective or mirrored effect sufficient to
dazzle motorists.
(ii) An owner, driver or operator of a vehicle shall not install or cause to be installed in
the vehicle any curtain, screen or other device that obstructs the view of a person into
the vehicle, unless the device is installed by the manufacturer of the vehicle and
approved by the Licensing Authority.
(iii) A person shall not drive, or have charge of, a vehicle on any road if a curtain, screen
or other device that obstructs the view of a person into the vehicle, is installed in the
vehicle, unless the device is installed by the manufacturer of the vehicle and approved
by the Licensing Authority.
(iv) Sub regulations (1) and (2) do not apply in the case of a curtain, screen or other
device that is being used on a rear window to shield a child five years of age or under
from the direct rays of the sun.
(v) A person who contravenes this regulation commits a traffic violation and is liable
to a fine of one thousand, five hundred dollars ($1,500.00).
(6) An owner, driver or operator of the vehicle shall ensure that no windscreen or window of
the vehicle has—
(i) scratches or other defects that unreasonably impair the driver’s vision through, or
unreasonably compromise the strength of, the windscreen or window;
(ii) laminated glazing or glass that shows ‘signs of discoloration that unreasonably
impair the driver’s vision through the windscreen or window; or
(iii) material with any bubbling or other defects that unreasonably impair the driver’s
vision through the windscreen or window.
(iv) A person who contravenes this regulation commits a traffic violation and is liable
to a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
General Exemptions as per the Window Tint Regulations
7. (i) Regulations 3, 4 and 5 do not apply to the following:
(a) a person who is issued an exemption certificate on medical grounds under regulation
7 in respect of a vehicle; and
(b) any of the following vehicles which the Licensing Authority exempts, having regard
to the use of the vehicle or the safety of its oecupants:
(c) any motor vehicle which is the property of or used by the President in his official
or personal capacity;
(d) any motor vehicle which is the property of or used by the Prime Minister in his
official or personal capacity;
U


--- page break ---

, 81/3
(e) an ambulance registered under the Emergency Ambulance Services and
Emergency Medical Personnel Act;
(f) any vehicle which is the property of or used by—
(i) the Police Service;
(ii) the Fire Service;
(iii) the Prison Service; :
(iv) the Defence Force;
(v) the Customs and Excise Division;
(vi) the Strategic Services Agency; or
(vii) a protective service agency within the meaning of section 2 of the
Supplemental Police Act;
(viii) a body transfer vehicle which is the property of and registered for use by
an undertaker or funeral home; or ~
(ix) any other vehicle authorised, in writing, by the Licensing Authority.
Requirement to have exemption certificates in vehicle at all times
7. (ii) A holder of an exemption certificate shall- ~
(a) have the certificate in the vehicle at all times; and
(b) upon request by a constable in uniform, produce the certificate for inspection.
(iii) A person who contravenes sub regulation (1) commits a traffic violation and is liable to a
fine of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
Use and Approval of light transmittance measuring device
8 (i) The visible light transmittance of a windscreen or window of a vehicle shall be measured
by a constable in uniform using a light transmittance measuring device approved by the
Licensing Authority.
(ii) For the purposes of sub regulation (1), a margin of error of plus or minus three
percentage points shall be allowed in relation to the measurement of the visible light
transmittance of a windscreen or window. .
(iii) Where a light transmittance measuring device is approved under sub regulation (1),
the Licensing Authority shall cause a notice of the approval to be published in the
Gazette
eici4ce


--- page break ---

. 4 YY” é ee
81/4

Procedure for Police Officers to obtain an Exemption for their private vehicles.

The Commissioner of Police is aware that there are some police officers who operate their
private vehicles with windows and windscreens treated (tinted), which prevent both the driver
and passengers from being observed from the outside by law enforcement personnel. The
rational being provided to officers on road check exercise that they are police officers with
firearms or attached to “high risk’ units.

The amendment to the MVRT Regulations explicitly states the categories of vehicles which
are exempted from the light transmissibility regulations under Section 6(1) as well as the
grounds for exemption requests to be considered by the Transport Commissioner.

Any Police Officer attached to the Trinidad & Tobago Police Service or Special Reserve Police
requesting an exemption from the tint requirements as required under Section 6(2), for the
reasons listed below including but not limited to;

a) being a Police Officer; §

b) personal security reasons;

¢) being attached to a high risk operational unit;

d) or any other reason pertaining to their employment as a Police Officer, may apply for
an exemption from the Commissioner of Police.

Police officers in their private capacity seeking to have their personal vehicles so tinted,
treated or darkened, so as to obscure their view inside the vehicle from the outside
MUST request an exemption. The process for an exemption is as follows:

1. Forward the exemption request application via the Office of the Commissioner of
Police or an officer so designated, =
2. ACP Specialized Support was so appointed.
3. ACP Specialised Support shall verify the reasons for the request and
a. Ifvalid, forward the request to the Transport Commissioner together with
a letter of approval having verified the reasons stated therein
b. If not approved notify the applicant in writing stating the reason the
application was denied 3
The requisite application must include the officers’ application and a comprehensive
report from his/her senior officer as to the need for the officer to be granted an exemption
certificate. .
This procedure is not exhaustive but may vary depending on other exigent circumstances that
may be peculiar to the particular officer Z
Please note that an exemption certificate granted by the Commissioner of Police is not
transferrable. Should the officer decide to sell his/her vehicle, the officer should state who are
the persons that would be the driver of his/her vehicle or be in charge of his/her personal vehicte
at any one time, this is for the purpose of managing the use of exemption certificates.
Any police officer operating their private vehicle in violation of the tint regulations shall be
subject to all fines and sanctions as stated in law which shall be enforced.
An exemption certificate register should be established as stated in the regulations to be kept
by the Commissioner of Police. 2g
Commissioner of Police
