Police Orders by Mr. Gary Griffith
; nk Commissioner of Police
“&,
(3) Police Administration Building
CAS Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
ye Port of Spain
WH Wednesday 7" July, 2021
coca TOLD PLE St (This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
No. 84 Departmental Order PART I— NIL
PARTI
EXAMINATION REGIME CHANGE
FOR PROMOTION EXAMINATIONS IN THE SECOND DIVISION
1. Introduction a
In accordance with the strategic direction of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service, the
Commissioner of Police has mandated the Police Service Examination Board (PSEB) to
reform the current examination regime which currently is in use in the Second Division of the
TTPS. It has been noted that every year, since, 2016, the PSEB has identified two main
concerns in its examination reports to the Commissioner of Police, namely, the high rates of
candidate failure and absenteeism. In keeping with the Commissioner’s vision, the PSEB has
conducted research, inclusive of a survey of candidates and several consultations with
stakeholders. The Board concluded that the following changes should be made:
i. a revision of curriculum with the purpose of developing, modern, candidate fricndly
syllabi.
ii. the incorporation of examination components that reflect the demands of the current job
descriptions of the various ranks in the Second Division as well as the new and pressing
demands on the modern Police Service. *
iii.the administration of examinations in formats which allow comprehensive assessment of
required knowledge, skills, and attitudes.
2. Purpose
This document provides information on the following: -
a. The curriculum revision process.
b. Training to be provided to officers to equip them with the necessary knowledge, skills
and attitudes for success. “
c. The format of the new examination regime for the Second Division of the Trinidad and
Tobago Police Service.
: ./2


--- page break ---

84/2
3. Curriculum Revision

The revised curriculum will provide candidates with the opportunities to develop the

knowledge, skills and attitudes needed to discharge the roles and functions of the respective

ranks in the Second Division.

3.1. The curriculum will comprise three subject areas, namely, Police Duties, Law and
Management, and will be known as the ‘promotional examination’.

3.2. Each subject area of the promotional examination will consist of a mix of objective type
questions such as multiple choice, and subje¢tive type questions such as essays.

3.3. The syllabi will be developed by subject matter experts and will be communicated to all
stakeholders prior to the examination.

3:4. The following subparagraphs and paragraph of Departmental Order No. 141, dated
Monday 21° September, 2020 are hereby rescinded, with effect from 31*t December,
2021:

3:4:1. subparagraph 5:1 which provides that:
‘Officers in the Second Division who have successfully passed the qualifying
examination in English Languagé, or who have been exempted from writing
the qualifying e:.amination in English Language shall be awarded Thirty-Five
(35) points.’
3:4:2. subparagraph 5:3 which provides that:
‘A Constable or Corporal, will bé required to write three (3) components in a
promotion examination namely English Language, Law and Police Duties.
Points awarded in each of the components shall be added together and divided
by the number of subjects taken to get the average marks (percentage) to be
allocated to him.’
3:4:3. subparagraph 5:4 which provides that:
*A Sergeant will be required to write one (1) component in the promotion
examination to the rank of Inspector, namely Business Communications. The
marks awarded to that officer in the examination shall be divided by the total
marks of that examination and multiplied by thirty-five (35) points, which
represent the maximum points for examination marks as stated in regulation
20 (5) of the Police Service Regulations, 2007, to get the points to be allocated
to him.’
3:4.4. paragraph 6 which provides that: ~~
‘6:1 All requests for exemptions from writing components of the promotional
examination as stated in 5:1, 5:3 and 5:4 must be submitted in writing to
the Police Service Examination Board for their consideration. Such
exemptions shall only be applied from the year of submission.
wil


--- page break ---

84/3
6:2 Officers in the Second Division who are holders of a Bachelor of Laws
Degree (LLB) from an institution recognised by the Accreditation
Council of Trinidad and Tobago, must apply in writing to be exempted
from writing the Law Component of the examination for promotion to
the ranks of Corporal and Sergeant.
6:3. An exemption pursuant to 6:2 does not apply to the promotional
examination as a whole but only applies to the Law Component of the
Examination.’
4. Training and development
The Trinidad and Tobago Police Service recognizes the important role that training and
development play in building capacity in any organization. To this end, training will be
provided for candidates prior to the conduct of the examinations to the respective ranks to
improve the level of success in the examinations. A further communication in this regard will
be seni to the candidates at the appropriate time.
5. Examination Administration

5.1. This new promotional examination regime will take effect from 1° January, 2022. A
schedule of examinations in this regard will be published at a subsequent date. All
candidates will be required to sit all components under the new examination regime in
2022. 7

5.2. The promotional examination will cover the three subject areas of Police Duties, Law
and Management.

5.3. To be deemed successful a candidate must pass all the subject areas of the promotional
exam.

5.4. A candidate who fails one or more subject areas of the promotional examination, will
be allowed to re-sit those subjects only once at the next scheduled exam.

5.5. A candidate who fails the promotional examination will be permitted to re-sit at the next
scheduled’ examination.

5.6. Candidates who have been successful in the promotional examination may also be
allowed to re-sit the examination. ’

5.7. The combined marks of the three subject areas of the promotional examination will be
added and divided by the number of components to give the final marks for the overall
examination.

5.8. With effect from the 1‘' January, 2022 there will be no exemptions for any of the subject
areas of the promotional examination in the Second Division for any candidate.

6. Transitional Arrangement

6.1. Examinations administered as published in Departmental Orders 55/2021 dated 3" May,
2021 will be the final opportunity for candidates to complete the requirement under the
current examination regime.

. ./4
—e ee ee ae a ee i :


--- page break ---

: 84/4

6.2. Candidates seeking exemptions in the English Language components under the existing
examination regime must submit their request for such exemption no later than the 29"
October, 2021. Applications for such exemption will not be granted to applicants failing
to meet this deadline.

6.3. In the period of transition to the new examination regime, all components of the current
respective examinations must be attempted and passed in 2021 as there will be no
referrals from these examinations in 2022.

6.4. Arrangements will be made so that officers will be given the chance to complete
requirements under the current examination regime. The requirements are as follows:

6.4.1. An officer will be allowed to complete any of the components of the present
examination which he has not completed for the final time in 2021. Where an
officer writes the said component but is unsuccessful, he/she will no longer be
allowed to rewrite it under the new regime in 2022. As such, whether an
officer fails one or all of the components of the present promotional
examination he/she must write all of the components of the new promotional
examination regime in2022. -

6.4.2. An officer who wishes to write the promotion examination in its present
format in 2021 ior the first time will be allowed to do so, however he or she
will not be allowed to rewrite any components in which he or she is not
successful, in 2022 under the rfew promotional examination regime, and
would be considered to have failed the 2021 examination outright.

PART III — NIL
a :
Commissioner of Police
