ne
te) Police Orders by Mrs Erla Christopher
an Commissioner of Police
Police Administration Building
Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
Se, ranenad RAGE PAT SEP Port of Spain
70, oo
AROTECT Anes Monday 17" June, 2024
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian employees of
the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
No. 91 Departmental Order PART If
Legal Supplement Part B—Vol. 63, No. 93—6th June, 2024 599
LecaL Notice No. 94
REPUBLIC OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
THe Motor VEHICLES AND Roap Trarric Act, CHapP. 48:50
ORDER
MADE BY THE MINISTER UNDER SECTION 62(2) OF THE Motor VEHICLES
AND RoaD Trarric Act
THE SPECIAL SPEED LIMITS (AMENDMENT) ORDER, 2024
1, This Order may be cited as the Special Speed Limits citation
(Amendment) Order, 2024.
2. The Special Speed Limits Order, 1979 is amended in the 6.No. 210
Schedule— ones
amen
(a) by deleting item 2 and substituting the following item:
Road Class or Description Time Special
of Motor Vehicie Speed Limit
Kilomeires
per hour
“2 (a) That part of Lady Young All motor vehicles except at all 65
Road in the County of a tractor, and in this times
St. George fram the provision tractor does not
Hastern Main Road to include a goods vehicle or
{the 3.8 kilometre post] private motor car with or
a point 3.8 kilometres without trailer
north of the Eastern
Main Road
() That part of Lady Young All moter vehicles except at all 50”; and
Roed in the County of a tractor, and in this times
St. George from the provision tractor does not
8.8 kilometre post to ite include a goods vehicle or
junction with St, Ann's private motor car with or
Road without trailer
(b) by inserting after item 25, the following items:
Road Class or Description Time Special
of Motor Vehicle Speed Limit
Kilometres
per hour
“26. The Western Main Read All motor vehicles except at all 65
from Mucurapo Road to the a tractor and in this times
intersection of the Western provision a tractor does
Main Road and Westland not include a goods
Avenue vehicle or private motor
car with or without
trailer
./2


--- page break ---

91/2
600 Special Speed Limits (Amendment) Order, 2024
Road Class or Description Time Special
of Motor Vehicle Speed Limit.
Kilomatres
per hour
27. Valsayn Branch Road, All motor vehicles except atall 30
Valsayn (Off the Curepe a tractor and in this times
Interchange) provision a:tractor does
not include a goods
vehicle or private motor
¢ar with or without
trailer
-28. Springvale Extension All motor yehicles except _at all 30
Road, Valsayn a tractor and in this times
provision a tractor does
not includs a goods
vehicle or private motor
car with or without
trailer
29, South Trunk Road from Allmotorvehiclesexcept at all 65
the Cross Crossing Interchange a tractor and in this times
to Dumfries Road provision a tractor does
not include a goods
vehicle or private motor
car with or without
trailer.
30. Interchanges and Ramps
within the St. George West
Distriet—

(a) Curepe Interchange Ali motorvehiclesexcapt at all 30
Ramp A from the a tractor and in this ‘times
Churchill-Roosevelt provision a tractor does
Highway (Eastbound) not include a goods
(West of the Southern vehicle or private motor
Main Road) to the tar with or without
Southern Main Road trailer
(Northbound) (east to
north movement);

(b} Cuvepe Interchange All motervehiclesexcept atall 30
Ramp BNorih Western a tractor and in this times
Clover Ramp-(aorth provision a tractor does
of the Churchili- not include a goods
Roosevelt Highway) vehicle or private. motor
from the Southemm Main car with or without
Road (Northbound) to trailer
the Churchill-Roosevelt
Highway (Fastbound)

(south to east movement);
a)


--- page break ---

91/3
Special Speed-Limits (Amendment) Order, 2024 601
Road Class or Description Time Special
of Motor Véhicle Speed Limit
per hour
{¢) Curepe Interchange All motor vehiclesexcept at ail 30
Ramp C North Eastern a tractor and in this times
Clover Ramp (north of provision a tractor does
the Churchill-Roosevelt not include a goods
Highway) from the vehicle or private motor
Churchill-Roogsevelt cay with or without
Highway (Eastbound) to trailer
the Southern Main Road
(Southbound);
(@) Curepe Interchange All motor vehiclesexcept _at-all 30.
Ramp D from the a tractor andin this times
Southern Main Road provision a tractor does
(Southbound) (north of not include a gocds
the Churchill-Roosevelt vehicle or private motor
Highway) to the ear with or without
Churchill-Roosevelt trailer
Highway (Eastbound)
(south ta east movement);
@ Curepe Interchange All motorvehiclesexcépt —_ at all 30
Ramp E from the a tractor and in this times
Southern Main Road provision a tractor does
(Northbound) (south of not include a goods
the Churchill-Roosevelt vehicle or private motor
Highway) tothe Churchil- car with or without
Raosevelt Highway trailer
(Westbound) (north to
west movement);
( Curepe Interchange Allmotorvehiclesexcept at all 30
Ramp F South Eastern a tractor and in this times
Clover Ramp (scuth of provision a tractor does
the Churchill-Rodsevelt not include a goods
Highway) from the vehicle or private motor
Southern Main Road car with or without
(Scuthbound) to the ailer
Churchill-Roosevelt
Highway (Westbound)
{south to west movement),
and
{g) Curepe Interchange Ali motor vehiclesexcept _atall 30”
Ramp G from the a tractor and in this _ times
Churchill-Roosevelt provision a tractor does
Highway (Westbound) not include a goods
{east of the Southern vehicle or private motor
Main Road} to the ear with or without
Southern Main Roadins  grailer
southerly direction (west
to.south movement),
A f4


--- page break ---

91/4
602 Special Speed Limits (Amendment) Order, 2024
Commencarent 3. This Order comes into operation on Monday 10th June, 2024,
Dated this 28th day of May, 2024.
R, SINANAN
Minister of Works and Transport
PRINTED AND PORIISHED BY THE GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CARONT
Repustic or TRINIDAD AND Tosaco—2024
PART I & IIIT — NIL
Mraz ;, Police
