Police Orders by
t) Commissioner of Police
»—f Police Administration Building
& Aw ; Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
[SE Port of Spain
eos Friday 17th June, 2022.
ROTECT ANDS (This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
SS
No. 92 Departmental Order PART I - NIL
PART II
Amendment to Standing Order 2
1. INFORMATION
The Commissioner of Police and his Executive has continued to keep with the mandate of the Strategic
Plan 2022-2024, the ultimate aim is to transform the Organization to world class status. It has become
necessary to ensure that the tools available to achieve this are also updated with the changing times. One
such tool can be found in the codified rules/regulations/bylaws in the form of the Trinidad and Tobago
Police Standing Orders. As such the following amendments have become requisite to these Standing
Orders in order to achieve the given mandate.
2. INTENTION
This Order is intended to amend Standing Order No. 2 by including Policies to the various methods of
information transmitted within the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service.
3. AMENDMENTS
Paragraph 1 of Trinidad and Tobago Police Service Standing Order 2 is hereby amended to include
“Policies”:
1, “Police Service Orders” shall consist of Standing Orders, Departmental Orders,
Divisional/Branch Orders, Operational Orders, Policies, Circulars, Notices
and Station Orders.
(d) “Policies” a course or principle of action adopted, written and
approved by the Commissioner of Police for the general information
and guidance of all Police Officers and civilian employees. Policies of
the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service represents general instructions
approved by the Commissioner of Police to be observed by all personnel.
«af


--- page break ---

92/2
PART IT
NOTICE
STANDING ORDER _ This Notice is intended to amend the authority empowering the Commissioner of Police
AUTHORITY to create Standing Orders. As such contained within the page of the Acknowledgement of
Amendment of the current Trinidad and Tobago Police Service Standing Orders, the authority used to
create the said document ‘Under Section 57(i)(a) of the Police Service Regulations Chapter
15:01” should now be amended to read ‘Under Section 194 of the Police Service
Regulations 2007’.
safe ine ———
Commission 4
