No. 02 
Police Orders by Dr. Dwayne Gibbs 
Commiss ioner of Police 
Police Administration Building 
cor. Edward & Sackville Streets 
Port -of-Spain 
Wednesday 4 (h Januar y, 2012 
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian 
Employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press) 
Departmenta l Order PARTT-NIL 
PART - II 
ESTABliSHMENT OF THE PROFFESSIONAL STANDARDS BUREAU (P.S.B) 
1. ESTABLISHMENT 
1 
With effect from 15th July, 2011, a Professional Standard Bureau was established in the 
Trinidad and Tobago Police Service. T he main office of this Bureau is located at Police 
Administr ation Building, cor. Edward & Sackville Streets, Port -of-Spain, telephone numbers 
625-2939/623-1583 and email: psb@ttps .gov.tt. Personnel of the Bureau will be responsible 
for ensuring the integrity, transparency and efficiency of all investigations, including Criminal 
Complaints made against Police Officers of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service. 
2. CLASSIFICATION 
The Professional Standard Bureau is classified as a C lass1 /Spe cialist Section. The officers 
attached to this Section will receive specialized training internally and externally. This Bureau 
will be comprised of two (2) Departments: 
• Administrativ e/Cle rical Officers (Administrators ) 
• Investigation Department (Investigative Officers; Intelligence Crime Analysts; 
Intelligence Officers) 
3. INTENTION 
~lbe Professional Standard Bureau is being established to develop and ensure that the Trinidad 
and Tobago Police Service is transparent and accountable in all of its operations and activities. 
This will foster greater trust and confidence by the public in our Service. 



2 
4. OBJECTIVES 
To ensure that all Administrative and Operational functions of the Trinidad and Tobago 
Police Service are transparent, accountable and can withstand public scrutiny. To achieve this, 
the following courses of action will be pursued: 
~ Comprehensive and thorough investigations that addresses all criminal, admin istrative, 
tactical, personnel and policy concerns . 
~ Implementation and development of technology, systems and processes to prov·ide 
accountability and trust in our investigatio ns. 
~ Develop a system that will ensure the public's trust in our internal investigations 
~ Conduct inquiries and audits of any aspect of Police Activities for the purpose of 
ascertaining whether there is police corruption or serious police misconduct or 
circumstances that may be conductive to both. 
5. ADMINISTRATIVE STRUCTURE 
The operations of the Professional Standard Bureau will fall under the administrative directive 
of the Assistant Commissioner of Police in charge of the Professional Standard Bureau, who 
will report to the Commiss ioner of Police. The sanctioned strength of the Professional 
Standard Bureau is as follows: 
Position Sanctioned Strength 
Senior Superintendent 0 
Superintendent 1 
Assistant Superintendent of Police 2 
Inspector of Police 3 
Sergeant of Police 9 
Corporal of Police 12 
Police Constable 30 
TOTAL SANCTIONED STRENGTH 57 
STRENGTH DISTRIBUTION 
Sub Units Supt. ASP Insp. Sgt. Cpl. PC Total 
Administration 1 1 1 1 1 3 8 
Intelligence Officers 1 2 4 8 15 
Intelligence Crime Analysts 1 2 3 



3 
Audit and Investigative 1 1 6 6 17 31 
Officers 
Total 1 2 3 9 12 30 57 
6. TRAINING 
Officers attached to this Bureau will receive training tailored to suit the needs of the criminal 
justice system in Trinidad and Tobago and to fulfil other legal requirements. The training 
will examine some of the following areas: 
• Interviewing Tools and Techniques 
• Cooperating Witnesses and Confidential Informants 
• Geographic Information System (GIS) 
• Crime Analysis 
• Surveillance techniques 
• Auditing 