Police Orders by 
Commissioner of Police 
Police Administration Building 
Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets 
Port of Spain 
~ _.,-.1(:. Monday 21st December 2009 
~crAMD~-
MirntPiutJIE. (This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian 
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press) 
No. 168 Departmental Order PART 1- NIL 
PART- II 
Subject: Policy document relating to the issuance and usage of cellular phones 
obtained from the State by the Commissioner of Police for use by members 
of staff 
With immediate effect, the following guidelines are to be strictly adhered to in relation to 
cellular phones and their usage. 
General 
It must be duly noted that all Cellular pbones and accessories are issued by the 
Commissioner of Police for official use by Heads of Divisions Branches and Civilian 
Managers of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service to ensure that vital communication is 
maintained in the effective performance of the duties assigned to the issuant. 
Issuance of Cellular Phones 
Cellular phones are to be issued to members of the Executive, First and Second in Command 
of Divisions and Branches and such other persons whom the Commissioner of Police deems 
fit to require such, in the performance of their functions where telecommunications systems 
outlined in Standing Order No 39(1-4) are either unavailable or may compromise the 
operations at hand. 
General Usage 
• Cellular phones are solely for the purpose of making and receiving official calls within 
the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago. 
• No international calls are to be made. 
• It is forbidden for any user to switch any Subscriber Identification Modules (S.I.M), 
parts, batteries or accessories purchased by the State, for use on any other cellular phone. 
• Cellular phone usage is limited for use by the issuant only, and should not exceed the 
following maximum expenditure allowed as follows 
.. ./2 



168/2 
o Cost of handset Cellular Phone Unit - One Thousand Eight Hundred DoJlars 
$1,800.00 
o Maximum Expenditure allowed to the issuant per billing cycle - Five Hundred 
Dollars $500.00 unless otherwise approved by the Commissioner of Police. 
• Any expenditure exceeding the amount mentioned above per bill cycle without any 
approval from the Commissioner of Police and/or any international calls made that are 
not made in an official capacity, shall be paid immediately in ful1 to the Senior 
Superintendent Finance Branch (Revenue Section ) or via salary deduction and deposited 
under the following :-
Head 11 1- Treasury Deposits 
Item 7 1 - Expenditure Recoveries 
Maintenance and Repair 
• New cellular phones are on warranty for the period of one year. 
• Cellular phones found to have manufacturers defects within the above mentioned period 
will be replaced or repaired at the expense of the service provider. 
• Any cellular phone which is physically damaged resulting from accidents or negligence 
such as damage caused by dropping, breaking or lighting impacts to the display 
screens( s) or evidence of the effects of water, dampness or the presence of moisture shall 
be repaired or replaced at the expense of the user 
• Any cellular phone that shows cracks or any physical damage to the exposed external 
parts including dents and/or deep heavy scratches which results in the mobile set being 
defective shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the user. 
• Whenever the software is manipulated by the installation and configuration of software 
downloads not in keeping with the manufacturer's perception for such phone including 
ring tones, pictures, videos and/or attachments to email received (whenever possible) 
resulting in a unit being partially or fully non functional, such handset shall be repaired or 
replaced at the expense of the user. 
• Whenever a mobile phone malfunctions as a consequence of defects or damage resulting 
from product misuse, or which goes against the information included in the unit's 
operations manual (User's Guide), such handset shall be repaired or replaced at the 
expense of the user 
• If a cellular phone is found to be defective, or malfunctioning, same inclusive of all parts 
and accessories must be returned to the Senior Superintendent Finance Branch with a 
troubleshoot telephone form shown at Appendix A, complete<L outlining the problems 
experienced 
• Under no circumstance should a cellular phone be opened by the user or serviced by any 
person who is not authorised to provide such service. 



168/3 
Loss of Cellular Phone 
• Upon the discovery of the loss, theft or destruction of a cellular phone, a report must be 
made immediately to the nearest Police Station where such lost, theft or destruction 
occurred. 
• Additionally, a report must also be submitted through the Second Division Officer in 
Charge of such Station where the report was made for onward transmission to the Senior 
Superintendent Finance Branch, and for the information of the Assistant Commissioner 
Police Anti Crime and Operations and the Commissioner of Police. The report must 
outline the circumstances under which such incident occurred. This report must be 
submitted to the Senior Superintendent Finance Branch five days following the initial 
report made at station. 
• The facts and circumstances surrounding the report , will be forwarded by the 
Commissioner of Police to the Permanent Secretary Ministry of National Security, and 
the Comptroller of Accounts as required by the Financial Regulations 
Return of CeUular phones 
• Cellular phones are to be returned to the Senior Superintendent Finance Branch in any of 
the Following circumstances 
Where the user: 
1. Proceeds on leave exceeding Forty ( 40) days either consisting of vacation or 
compensatory leave or both 
2. Is no longer in charge or second in command in charge of a Division Branch or Section. 
3. Resign, retires, dies, or in any way demits office. 
4. Upon expiration or termination of the employment, on contract. 
5. Where the item was issued for temporary use and the periods of use has expired. 
Roaming 
• Prior approval from the Commissioner of Police must first be sought by officers as well 
as Civilian Managers travelling outside of Trinidad and Tobago on official duty that 
would require the use of roaming facilities . Requests for such approval must be done 
though the Second Divisional Officer in charge Utilities only . 
.. ./4 



198/4 
[nternet Features 
• Approval from the Commissioner of Police must be sought for the activation of internet 
facilities on an individual merit basis per cell phone. This must be done through the 
Second Division Officer in charge Utilities, only. 
Purchase by the User 
• Users may be given the option to purchase the cell phones issued in the following 
circumstances 
a. Where the unit is up to one year old 
b. Where the unit is over one year old 
and up to three years old 
c. Where the unit is over three years old 
50% of its purchase price 
25% of its purchase price 
5% of its purchase price 
Police Officers and Civilian Managers contracted under the Police Service , issued with cellular 
phones by the Commissioner of Police , must have a clear understanding of the responsibilitie s 
entailed therein when being issued with any such phone. This document must be brought to the 
attention of all persons and parties concerned . 
Please be guided accordin gly 
f 
j f\ 
n[i/ L au ~ v.J 
issioner of Police e:;:::-. 