No. 136 
Police Orders by Mr. Trevor Paul 
Commissioner ofPolice 
Police Administration Building 
Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets 
Port of Spain 
Thursday 9th August 2007 
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian 
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press) 
Departmental Order PART I- NIL 
PART -II 
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE CRIME AND PROBLEM ANALYSIS (CAPA) BRANCH 
IN THE TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO POLICE SERVICE 
1. GENERAL BACKGROUND 
The Crime and Problem Analysis (CAP A) Branch was established in the Trinidad and Tobago 
Police Service on lOth May 2007, in accordance with Cabinet Minute Number 1155. The CAPA 
Branch consists of two sections, the Crime Records and Information Section (CRIS) and the Crime 
Analysis Section (CAS) . The former focuses on data collection and the latter on the collation, 
analysis and reporting of data. CAP A's head office is located at Police Headquarters , St. Vmcent 
Street, Port-of-Spain with assigned telephone numbers 625-5148 or 624-1996, 623-4421 and 624-
4300 fax 625-4770 email capabranch(a Ltps.gov.n 
2. INFORMATION: 
Crime analysis is an integral and indispensable element in the efficient and effective operations of 
police organizations worldwide. Through crime analysis, police managers can be provided with 
crucial and timely information for making strategic decisions in the fight against crime. It is 
intended that the CAP A Branch will collate , process and analyse information collected in a timely, 
regular and routine manner. The Branch will disseminate the data derived from information 
gathering for making decisions about crime and criminal activity. It will identify important patterns , 
trends, "hot spots", suspects and strategies for providing specific information to assist in 
departmental planning . 
3. THE C.A.P.A. BRANCH 
3.1 Duties and Responsibilities: 
The essential duties and responsibilities of the CAPA Branch are as follows : 
•!• To compile, organize and review raw data from crime reports and other sources; 
•!• To enter raw data into appropriate databases and generate statistical reports; 
•!• To review, analyse, investigate and integrate statistical informatio~ determine and make 
conclusions about patterns, trends, "hot spots", suspects, etc.; 
•!• To assign, plan, organize and conduct special crime and related statistical studies and projects; 
•!• To provide data to aid future planning and decision making ; 
•!• To determine analytical techniques and information gathering processes and obtain necessary 
information and data analyses; 
•!• To maintain and utilize a geo-codable mapping system to monitor and analyse suspects and 
criminal activities; 
•!• To analyse, store, retrieve and manipulate spatial data and create crime maps that provide 
stakeholders with visual images of crime patterns and locations of crimes and suspects and 
•!• To provide relevant information for external agencies. 



136/2 
4. REQUEST FOR INFORMATI ON: 
Members of the Service are encouraged to make use of C.A.P.A. with a view to meeting the 
crime targets set for the organization In that regard, C.A.P.A. personnel will be posted in all 
Divisions to function as direct support staff to the Head of Division, supervisors and other 
officers. However, where in an effort to assist external agencies/individuals in sourcing 
information from the CAP A Branch, the following procedures shall be adopted : -
The individual/institution must submit a letter of request addressed to the ACP Crime, which 
must include: 
• The name and address of the institution/individual making the request, 
• The purpose for which the information is required, 
• The telephone contact # (if any) ofthe individuaVinstitution making the request, 
• The e-mail address of the individual/institution making the request and 
• The authentication of the inquiring institution. 
5. HUMANRESOU RCEALLOCA TIO N 
5.1 Sanc tioned Strength 
1- ASP 1- Inspector 6- Sergeants 2- Corporals 17- Constables 
See Appendix A with the list of officers transferred and posted. 
5.2 C ivilian Employees 
The Branch will be staffed with 26 civilian employees comprising: 
5 - Senior Crime Analysts 
21 - Crime Analysts 
6. THE DIVISIONAL CRIME RECORD ER AND ANALYSTS 
6.1 Duties and Responsibilities: 
In each division, there will be a Divisional Crime Recorder and a Junior Crime Analyst. The 
Recorder will be responsible for the collection and collation of information. He will have a direct 
relationship with the Data Entry Clerks for accurate reporting and validity of the information 
recorded. In addition, there shall be five (5) Senior Crime Analysts. One will be posted at the 
C.A.P.A. Headquarters. The other four (4) will be posted to the four (4) regions controlled by 
Assistant Commissioners North East, North West, South and Tobago and supervised by the Lead 
Analyst, a police sergeant, attached to the respective division. 
7. DIVISIONAL CRIME RECO RDER 
7.1 Duties and Respons ibilities: 
• To ensure that crimes are accurately classified and coded in accordance with its classification. 
• To ensure that the reports in relation to a crime are classified and corresponding . 
• To ensure that the crime report forms are properly stored at stations and Divisional 
Headquarters. 
• To secure all Incident Crime Report Forms after having been stored in the database and a 
General Occurrence (GO) Number registered. 
• To assist the Lead Crime Analyst with the direction and coordination of data collection for the 
team. 



136/3 
• To provide the official Divisional Crime Monthly Statistical Return in hard copy on the 4th 
working day of the following month . 
• To provide interim monthly crime statistics on the 2od working day of the following month to the 
main C.A.P.A office. 
• To provide daily, for rapid dissemination, tactical crime analysis through the examination of 
crime data, and identify patterns, series and profiles as they emerge_ 
• To assist in the compilation of statistical reports through the analysis of criminological data and 
evaluate , identify and forecast emerging trends in crimes, disorders, calls for service and traffic 
offences 
• To assist in the preparation of reports , charts, graphs and maps for administrative use by reading, 
interpreting and analysing criminological data 
• To provide data in response to requests from Crime Investigators on specific 
investigations/cases . 
• To source and compile data for the preparation, presentation, briefing and coordination of 
activities at the Branch . 
• To assist the Senior and Lead Crime Analysts in identifying cross-jurisdictional patterns and 
trends by examining the statistical reports and data. 
• To use the Global Positioning System (GPS) to assist in identifying crime hot spots. 
• To compile and submit the annual divisional statistical return to the Lead Crime Analyst 
responsible for the region in which they function. 
• To supply the Main CAP A Office with a list of the cancellations of all crimes for the month 
under review by the second working day of the following month . 
• To supply the main CAP A Office with a list of all reported crimes entered in the month under 
review by the second working day of the next month . 
8. THE SENIOR CRIME ANALYST 
8.1 Duties and Responsibilities: 
The senior crime analyst will be expected to perform the following duties : -
• Schedules the daily tasks of the Crime Analysts to ensure that priorities , goals and objectives 
are met. 
• Provides the Crime Analysts with on-the-job training and technical assistance through the 
execution of training and developmental programmes. 
• Assists with the direction and coordination of data collection for the team, through liaison with 
the Lead Crime Analyst. 
• Monitors and reviews the work of Crime Analysts to ensure compliance with laws, rules, 
regulations and standards by providing regular advice and feedback on performance . 
• Performs daily tactical crime analysis and identifies crime patterns by reviewing crime and 
disorder incidents . 
• Evaluates through the analysing of criminologica l data, and forecasts trends, patterns and 
profiles to target long-term issues. 
• Prepares and provides presentations and/or briefmgs to specific groups through the use of 
computer databases , statistical reports and applications . 
• Supports the work of senior police officers with respect to specific investigations/cases by 
providing timely analysis of crime data. 
• Works with the Lead Crime Analyst in the examination of patterns , series, profiles and trends 
through the use of various computer databases to make recommendations for operational and 
investigative tactics and strategies. 



136/5 
• Evaluates and forecasts trends to target long-term issues through the analysis of criminological 
data; 
• Prepares and provides presentations and/or briefings to specific groups as requested, through the 
use of computer databases and statistical reports and applications; 
• Supports the work of senior police officers with respect to specific investigations /cases by 
providing timely and accurate analyses of crime data; 
• Works with the Senior Crime Analyst in the various divisions to identify cross-jurisdictional 
patterns and trends by examining the statistical reports and data; 
• Examines patterns , series, profiles and trends through the use of various computer databases and 
crime reports received by the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service, in arriving at 
recommendations for operational and investigative tactics and strategies. 
• Prepares reports , charts, graphs and maps for administrative use; by reading interpreting and 
analyzing criminological data; 
• Ensures that the requests by crime investigators , for data relating to specific investigations/cases 
are met; 
• Coordinates and carries out presentations and briefings as required by the sourcing and 
systematic compilation of data pertinent to the presentation ; 
• Ensures that work related to the Global Positioning System (GPS) is carried out; 
• Assumes ultimate responsibility for the quality and accuracy of the output of the crime analysis 
teams; 
• Provides training for police officers located in their areas to understand the value of crime 
analysis in their daily work; 
• Utilises his authority to clear roadblocks between crime analysis and operational 
effectiveness . 
11. METHOD 
11.1 The CAP A Branch will liaise with both internal and external agencies in the performance of its 
function . The operations of CAP A will involve networking with officers and databases of the 
Fingerprint Bureau , Photography Section, Criminal Intelligence Branch, Homicide Bureau and 
all other Branches and Divisions , towards gathering or disseminating information on crime 
reports , crime scenes and criminal activities . 
11.2 The CAP A Branch will also seek to network with other Law Enforcement Officers and external 
agencies that are stakeholders in the fight against crime. Three approaches shall be applied: -
1. Tactical Analysis - This approach provides information to assist personnel in the identification 
of specific and immediate crime problems and the arrest of criminal offenders through crime 
mapping, profiling of victims and offenders and the use of photographs. The analysis of data is 
used to promote a quick response in field situations to assist the supervisor in making strategic 
decisions and deploying personnel in response to specific reports of crime. 
2. Strategic Analysis - This approach is concerned with real-time analysis of the activities of 
criminal behaviour and extrapolating projections of long-term increases or decreases in crime . 
It also includes the preparation of statistical summaries of crime, often referred to as exception 
reports . Strategic analysis reveals the true position of the commission of crimes, which enable 
the determination of hotspots and the identification of beat configuration for the optimum 
deployment of personnel. 
3. Administrative Analysis - This approach focuses on the provision of economic , geographic or 
social information to administrators (e.g. reports to Government , Borough and City Council, 
Central Statistical Office etc.). 



136/6 
12. CRIME ANALYSIS TASKS 
Crime Analysts are tasked to detect the following: -
•!• Crime Trend: The long-term increases or decreases in crime 
•!• Crime Pattern: The occurrence of similar offences in a defined geographic area, either a single 
reporting district, a beat, or an entire jurisdiction 
•!• Crime Series: A crime pattern where there is reason to believe the same person or persons 
committed the crimes 
•!• Crime Spree: A crime pattern in which the responsible offender or offenders commit multiple 
crimes from location to location in rapid succession. 
13. COMMUNICATION 
This section will network and collaborate with stakeholders of the under mentioned agencies: -
Internal 
1. Special Anti Crime Unit (S.A.U.) 
2. Criminal Intelligence Branch (C.I.U.) 
External 
1. Forensic Science Centre 
2. The Judiciary 
3. Ministry ofNational Security and its various Departments 
4. Transport Division 
5. Election and Boundaries Commission 
6. Central Statistical Office 
7. Strategic Services Agency (SSA) 
8. Security Intelligence Agency (SIA) 
9. Telecommunication Services 
10. Attorney General's Department 
11. The Airport Authority 
12. Customs & Excise Division 
13. Tobago House of Assembly (THA) 
14. Other Government Departments and NGO's 
15. Director of Public Prosecution 
14. AMENDMENTS 
•!• S.O. #30 Paragraph 2 (1) (c) is amended to delete Modus Operandi and Records Bureau and 
replace it by the C.A.P.A. Branch. 
•!• S.O. # 30 paragraph 2 (2) is hereby amended to read the Fingerprint Bureau and Photography 
Section together forms the Criminal Records Office 
•!• S.O. #30, Part ill Section 35 and 36 is amended to replace Modus Operandi and Records Bureau 
with the Crime and Problem Analysis Branch (C.A.P.A). 
Departmental Order No. 87, dated Tuesday 04th April 2006 is hereby rescinded. 