CC OOOO EE EE ———ovOV30U..—rreeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee ee eee
C) Police Orders by
CAS Commissioner of Police
Yew Police Administration Building
eo Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
% ox Port of Spain
ET eae Monday 29th July, 2019
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian employees
of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
No. 134 Departmental Order PART I - NIL
PART II
ISSUANCE OF POLICE BADGES AS AN ITEM OF KIT IN THE TRINIDAD AND
TOBAGO POLICE SERVICE
1. AUTHORITY
Regulation 121 of the Police Service Regulations 2007 (Appendices C and D) provides the
description of all items of uniform and the orders of dress to be worn by police officers and
confers upon the Commissioner of Police the authority to prescribe such dress with the
approval of the Minister of National Security which shall be published in the gazette.
The official approval needed for police officers whilst on duty in uniform to wear a badge,
emblem or other decoration as specified in Regulation 122 has been obtained. As such police
officers in the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service are now/hereby required to wear Badges
on their uniforms.
2. BACKGROUND
In keeping with the ‘Total Transformation and Modernization’ of the Trinidad and Tobago
Police Service, the Organization/Leadership has embarked on the use of Police Badges in order
to elevate the organization to first world status.
1


--- page break ---

«< me |
3. INTENTION
The intention of this Order is to appraise the membership of the Trinidad and Tobago Police
Service (TTPS) of the introduction, the issuance and procedures for the use of Police Badges
to all police officers. All members of the service are required to adhere to this policy and the
measures outlined in this Departmental Order.
Effective from the publication of this Order, police Badges will be an item of kit within
the TTPS.
4. ISSUANCE OF BADGES
a. Badges will be issued to every member of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service.
The initial issue of Badges will be done in accordance with the directions of
Commissioner of Police. Thereafter issue of Badges shall be done by the Police
Stores.
b. All Badges issued to police officers shall be recorded in a Register known as the
“Kit Book” and shall hereinafter be referred to as “Kit”.
5. DESCRIPTION OF BADGES
a. The Badges are of two (2) types, to distinguish between First and Second Division
Officers: see Appendices 1 and 2
I. | Gold Badges shall be worn by First Division Officers
II. Silver Badges shall be worn by Second Division Officers (SDO’s).
b. The Badge consists of the following:
i The name of the Organisation — Trinidad and Tobago Police Service (TTPS)
ii The TTPS Logo
iii The full name of the officer (inclusive of the initial of a second/middle
name)
iv The officer’s regimental number
c. Each Badge is equipped with a clipped-on Black wallet at the rear of the Badge
which should contain the officers Police Identification Card as an accompaniment
to the Badge for officer identification.
2


--- page break ---

a , ve
6. WEARING OF BADGES BY UNIFORM OFFICERS
For uniform Police officers, Badges are to be worn on such part of their uniform and “Orders
of Dress” as designated by the Commissioner.
7. WEARING OF BADGES BY PLAIN CLOTHES OFFICERS
Police Officers (with the exception of those assigned to highly sensitive and covert units),
dressed in plainclothes shall wear their badge on such part of their civilian outfit as designated
by the Commissioner.
8. USE OF BADGES
Badges together with the accompanying police Identification Cards are to be used for the
purpose of identifying such persons as bona fide officers of the TTPS. A police officer whether
in uniform or plainclothes shall produce his/her badge upon the request of members of the
public.
9. LOSS AND REPLACEMENT OF BADGES
a. The loss of a Police Badge must be immediately reported to the Second Division
Officer_in_ charge of Station/Section/Unit/Branch to which the officer is
attached. On receipt of this report the SDO in charge will submit a report to the
First Division Officer in charge of the Division/Branch/Unit/Section for
transmission to the Deputy Commissioner for publication in Departmental Orders.
In the case of a First Division such loss must be reported immediately to the Head
of the Division/Branch/Unit/Section_to_which_the_FDO_is attached for
transmission to the Deputy Commissioner for publication in Departmental Orders.
b. Concurrent with the submission of this report, the Officer in charge of the
Division/Branch/Unit/Section will detail a senior officer in rank to the officer
concerned to investigate the loss and submit his/her findings.
c. A replacement Badge shall be immediately issued to the Police Officer, upon
submission after the submission of such report.
d. Loss of Badges under negligent circumstances shall result in disciplinary action
instituted against the officer concerned.
3


--- page break ---

oc
10. SURRENDER OF BADGES
Police officers who have retired, resigned, otherwise discharged or have been dismissed,
interdicted or suspended shall forthwith surrender their Police Badge to the First Division in
charge of the Division/Branch/Unit/Section to which they were last attached:
1 In the case of First Division Officers, the officer in charge of the
Division/Branch/Unit/Section shall submit the Badge to the Commissioner of Police.
it In the case of Second Division Officers, the Badge shall be submitted to the Deputy
Commissioner of Police
il In cases of interdiction or suspension, a police officer who is reinstated into the Service;
he shall be re-issued his/her Police Badge.
|. Officers in charge of Divisions/Branches/Units/Sections must ensure that these
instructions are complied with.
11. DESTRUCTION OF BADGES
Where a Badge is defaced, mutilated or damaged, such Badge must be immediately submitted,
along with a written report in order that a new Badge can be obtained. Jn the case of a Second
Division Officer, the report must be submitted to the Deputy Commissioner of Police (DCP)
and in the case of a First Division Officer, to the Commissioner of Police (CoP).
12. AMENDMENTS
This Departmental Order supports and amends the following:
a. Section 7 of Standing Order 6 (Attire and Appearance)
b. Section 4 (in part) and Section 8 of Standing Order 7 (Identification Cards)
c. Section | (in part) of Standing Order 12 (Uniform and Equipment)
PART III — NIL
Commissioner of Police
4


--- page break ---

£& ‘ rd
APPENDIX 1
(& ht ae a fe ™ ah
GN = FDO 1" Name Initial & Surname
[et See mA et re
| ae a :
wr 4 ‘ manne Sis Example: J. Doe
FDO Service Number
Example: 99999
any
Jae ~, SDO 1° Name Initial & Surname
jf » 55 Nilesat ea chaos me! 4
Abe aac 7 Example: A. Player
SDO Service Number
Example: 00001
5


--- page break ---

APPENDIX 2- POLICE BADGES
om SS
Ss — 3 > re = BEE ‘ > }
0 SPs Yee
Second Division Officer Badge
6
