Saw Police Orders by
<y Commissioner of Police
te, Police Administration Building
NEAK Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
~~ ih Port of Spain
% --* Wednesday 11" October, 2017
ale (This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
No. 120 Departmental Order PART I—NIL
PART II
Corporate Communications Unit
‘ By virtue of Departmental Order No. 7] dated Monday 3" June, 2010: the Public
Affairs Unit was established within the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service (TTPS). The
Unit comprised the following:
> One (1) Public Affairs Director;
» One (1) Public Affairs Manager;
»” Six (6) Public Affairs Officers:
» One (1) Administrative Secretary and
» Two (2) Administrative Support Officers.
The Public Affairs Unit was established to build awareness of the roles, responsibilities,
policies and programmes of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service among the various
publics, and to foster an understanding of the vision and direction of the organization.
However, as the public affairs unit functions evolved, it has become necessary for the
composition of this unit to be revisited and upgraded: to provide for greater levels of
efficiency to the strategic communication function within the TTPS.
The unit shall now be restructured as follows:
(1) The Public Affairs Unit shall be renamed the Corporate Communications Unit;
(ii) It shall be led by a Head - Corporate Communications who shall have overall
responsibility for the Unit;
(iii) The Events Co-ordinator and the Audio Visual function shall now be incorporated
under the Corporate Communications Unit:


--- page break ---

120/2
The Sanctioned strength of the Corporate Communications Unit shal] be as follows:
Head - Corporate Communications - (Civilian Post)
Assistant Superintendent of Police
Public Information Officer
Senior Corporate Communications Officer (Civilian Post) Pol]
Events Co-ordinator - (Civilian Post) Pol]
Corporate Communications Officers — ( Civilian Post) |
Police Sergeant ol]
Administrative Secretary — (Civilian Posts)
Police Corporals
Administrative Support Officers— (Civilian Posts)
Police Constables
This order seeks to reconfirm the functions of the Unit;
¢ Preparing a plan and a budget for implementation of internal and external
communication strategies and activities
e Developing standard communication Operating procedures and protocols for the
Trinidad and Tobago Police Service
¢ Standardization of the use/representation of the organizational brand
e¢ Managing and nurturing harmonious media relations
¢ Maintaining of social media profile and presence
¢ Preparing and producing informative material including publications, videos and
materials for presentations, displays and exhibits
° Coordinating/organizing all organizational events, functions, seminars, consultation
and conference services


--- page break ---

120/3
¢ Monitoring, evaluating and proactively responding to print, electronic and social media
reports
* Monitoring of customer satisfaction levels
* Supporting mechanisms for establishing linkages with communities.
e Timely and effective dissemination of information to both the internal and external
publics,
¢ Assist in Divisional and Branch activities where necessary and practicable by providing
technical audio-visual and photographic support.
The Corporate Communications Unit is located on the Second F loor, Police Administration
Building, Corner Edward and Sackville Streets, Port-of-Spain, telephone nos. 625-8395
and 623-3044 and email at publicaffairs@ttps. gov.tt.
PART III - NIL
