Police Orders by Mr. Gary Griffith
Commissioner of Police
Police Administration Building
Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
Port of Spain
7 Pre ot
ho Wednesday 8" July, 2020
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
No. 112 Departmental Order PART I—NIL PART II
Reproduced here is correspondence from the Judiciary of Trinidad and Tobago.
Please be guided by same.
26" June 2020
PUBLIC NOTICE
RESUMPTION OF LICENSING COMMITTEE OPERATIONS
Members of the public are advised that the operations of the Licensing Committees at all Licensing
Districts have been adjusted.
CATEGORIES OF LICENCES

Spirit Retailer’s Restaurant Wine Merchants

Wine Retailer’s Night Bar Moneylender’s

Hotel Spirit Spirit Grocer’s Pawnbroker’s

Special Hotel Spirit Dealer’s Members Club

A. Completed Applications

If you submitted an application and all requirements were met, it may have been heard or it may be
awaiting hearing.

(i) Matters Already Heard
If your application has been heard, the licence may have been granted and prepared for collection. Please
contact the Court office at which your application was lodged on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and
Thursdays between the hours of 1lam and 3:00pm for further directions. Please see the enclosed
directory for contact information.
(ii) Hearings

Unless there is sound and exceptional reason for an in person hearing, all licensing hearings will be by
telephone or video technology.


--- page break ---

112/2
If there are no objections to an application, the granting or renewal of the application can be done in the
absence of the applicants or their representatives. If there are objections, the hearing will be adjourned
and a resolution meeting will take place virtually (by teleconference, video meeting, or both)
The committee may on its own or after considering applications, determine if a hearing is necessary in
which case, the Secretary of the committee will communicate with applicants or other parties to make
arrangements.
B. New Applications
i, All persons or business places wishing to sell intoxicating liquor (beer, rum, wine and other
spirits) must obtain a liquor licence. You must apply by submitting the documents listed below
(via e-mail or by placing it in the collection box at the court) to the Secretary of the
Liquor Licensing Committee at the District Court closest to the establishment under
construction.
z For email submissions: Please email to the relevant licensing committee as detailed in the
directory below
a. For drop submissions, please deposit a sealed envelope in the appropriately identified
collection box at the court. Please address it as follows:
Chairman of the Licence Committee
[Name of Magistrate Court]
License Application for [Name of Establishment]
[Address of Establishment]
Documents Required for New Applications
The following documents are required when applying for a liquor licence:
" Liquor Licence application forms filled out (5 copies). *Available at www. ttlawcourts.org
. A copy of Photo Identification
s Contact Number
. Email Address
4 Board of Inland Revenue File (BIR) Number.
. Floor plan of premises to be licensed.
. Valid Police Certificate of Good Character of owner/ applicant.
bd Town and Country building approvals for the premises to be used for the purpose being applied.
. Fire Department’s report on the premises.
. Health report on premises.
" Customs and excise report (where applicable)


--- page break ---

112/3

Upon submission of your application with the required documents you will receive a reference number.
Please note that your application will only be processed once all of the above requirements have been
submitted. All application fees will be collected at the court once the required documents have been
submitted with your application.
C. Filing of Objections
Submission of Objections (Section 21 (1) of the Liquor Licences Act.
Objections should be filed via email prior to the date of hearing using the email addresses provided in
the directory below.
If you are unable to access technology to file your objection electronically, please place it in a sealed
envelope and deposit in the collection box at the court location closest to the establishment under
consideration.
Objections must state:

a. The name of the establishment the objection is being lodged against

b. The grounds for objection

c The name and contact information (email address, telephone and address) of the person

or entity lodging the objection
Every objection shall be heard by the licensing committee in the manner described above in Part A,
section (ii): ‘Hearings’.
D. Incomplete Applications
You are advised to call the Court registry at which your application was lodged for the status of your
application or if you have any questions about outstanding requirements. Your application will be
acknowledged and reviewed. You will be contacted regarding a hearing date and your access to the
hearing.
E. Application Procedure for in-person Meeting/ Hearings
Where parties are unable to access technology to facilitate telephonic or virtual hearings, an application
should be made, in writing, addressed to ‘the Chairman of the Licencing Committee’ by email or by
deposit in the Licensing Box at the relevant Court building. This application must be submitted no later
than 5 working days before the hearing date, stating the facts and reasons which make the matter fir for
in-person hearing. The request can be emailed to the email addresses provided in the directory below.
A representative of the licensing committee will contact applicants via email or telephone within 48 hours
of their request with the decision of the committee.
weld


--- page break ---

112/4
F. Site Visits
The application process for new applications includes a visit to the premises by members of the licensing
committee. Visits are contingent upon public health guidelines and approvals for the re-opening of
licensed premises.
G. Other Information
The Licensing Committees will communicate periodically regarding their operations including providing
dates for the Regular Sessions.
For specific information relative to any application, please access the directory below to contact the
Licensing Committee at the Magisterial court location.
LICENSING COMMITTEE DIRECTORY
LICENSING COMMITTEES COURT EMAIL ADDRESS CONTACT NUMBER
LOCATION
Chairperson: Davika Seecharan Arima licensing.arima@ttlawcourts.or (868)223-1060 Ext. 2908-
(a ll eel
Chairperson: Susan Ramnath Chaguanas licensing.chaguanas@ttlawcourts.or: (868)223-1060 Ext. 1801-
peecratcne |
Chairperson: Susan Ramnath Couva licensing.couv@ttlawcourts.or: (868)223-1060 Ext.
feeorsvmtrtmie | | | in
Chairperson: Mary Ali Mayaro licensing. mayaro@ttlawcourts.or (868)223-1060 Ext. 2961-
fears |p |
Chairperson: Chandaye Darsoo Point Fortin licensing.pointfortin@ttlawcourts.org | (868)223-1060 Ext. 1850-
feecrvnenoee | P|
Chairperson: Ulric Kanhai Rio Claro licensing. rioclaro@ttlawcourts.or: (868)223-1060 Ext. 2985-
erent | |
Chairperson: Chandaye Darsoo San Fernando | licensing.sanfernando@ttlawcourts.org | (868)223-1060 Ext. 1915-
fmeerneseoe ff |
Chairperson: Mary Ali Siparia licensing.siparia@ttlawcourts.or: (868)223-1060 Ext. 2908-
mers mami | | |S
Chairperson: Junior Hills Port of Spain | licensing.portofspain@ttlawcourts.org (868)223-1060
Secretary: Neil Sookram Ext. 2633-
4/2636/2640/2679/2698
Chairperson: Junior Hills Tobago licensing.tobago@ttlawcourts.or: (868)223-1060 Ext.
mormon | [| me
Chairperson: Davika Seecharan Tunapuna licensing.tunapuna@ttlawcourts.or: (868)223-1060 Ext.
Eee Mined! eemieeenemeeee ee
q — ——— —_ sponte ak ea


--- page break ---

112/5
Please visit the Judiciary’s website for weekly updates and additional information on licensing committee
operations at:
http://www.ttlawcourts.org/liquorlicences
PART III — NIL
ee
Commissioner of Police
COO eee
