Sy, Police Orders by Mr. Gary Griffith

Ao Commissioner of Police
Police Administration Building

NT Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
ee Port of Spain
Prrorecr ses Wednesday 22 July, 2020
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
ee
No. 117 Departmental Order PART I — NIL PART II
BODY ART AND MODIFICATION POLICY

Executive Summary
In keeping with the promotion of a positive and professional image by members of the Trinidad and
Tobago Police Service (TTPS), it is imperative that appropriate standards of dress, grooming and conduct
be maintained. It is the expectation of the TTPS that all person seeking entry to become Police Officers
in the TTPS will uphold and reflect the organization’s image as well as its values.
Therefore, the purpose of this policy is to outline the standards expected of potential police recruits
relative to body art and modification in order to ensure that the image and professionalism of the TTPS
is not in any way brought into disrepute.
1.0 INTRODUCTION
The Trinidad and Tobago Police Service Recruiting and Selection department of the Police Academy
seeks to recruit and select highly qualified candidates who are nationals of Trinidad and Tobago.
As part of the recruitment and selection process for qualifying as a suitable candidate, candidates will
need to satisfy the body art and modification standards outlined in this Policy. Body art and modification
standards have been established by the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service to maintain a professional
image that is consistent with the:

e Values of the organization

e Code of Conduct and Ethics

e Vision and Mission Statement
Failure to satisfy those said standards, will result in the Candidate being an Unsuccessful Candidate
within the meaning of the Recruitment and Selection Policy.

wala


--- page break ---

117/2
2.0 SCOPE
This policy applies to all Candidates for appointment as a Trainee in accordance with the Police Service
Regulations 15:01 as amended.
3.0 DEFINITIONS
3.0.1 Body art and modification means modifying, decorating, changing, or altering the appearance
and/ or form of the body through body piercing, tattooing, and branding.
3.0.2 Recruiting Officer means the officer or person in charge of the Police Academy in accordance
with Regulation 4 (5) of the Police Service Regulations, Police Service Act Chapter 15:01 as amended.
3.0.4 Suitable Candidate means a Candidate who successfully completes all required steps in the
Recruitment and Selection Process for appointment as a Trainee, or, for appointment as a Band
Apprentice.
3.0.5 Trainee refers to a person other than a police officer, recruited by the Trinidad and Tobago Police
Service and undergoing the approved (induction) programme training at the Police Academy or such a
venue designed for that purpose and has been approved by the Commissioner of Police for such a
purpose, prior to being appointed as a Police Constable.
3.0.6 Unsuccessful Candidate means a Candidate who is eliminated from the Recruitment and Selection
Process through failing to meet the minimum standards required in the recruitment and Selection Process.
4.0 PROHIBITIONS
In accordance with the Recruitment and Selection Policy, Candidates shall not display body art and
modification on the head, face, neck, ears, scalp, or hands. For the purpose of this Policy, the prohibited
areas of the neck and hands are considered to be anything visible beyond the fastened collar or the sleeve
cuff of the grey shirt.
Body art and modification elsewhere on the body that a reasonable person would conclude are prejudicial
to good order, discipline and morale or are of a nature to bring discredit upon the Trinidad and Tobago
Police Service are prohibited.


--- page break ---

117/3
For example, body art and modification that are excessive, obscene, sexually explicit or advocate or
symbolize sex, gender, racial, religious, homophobic, or political ideologies, ethnic or national origin
discrimination are prohibited. In addition, body art and modification that advocate or symbolize gang
affiliation, violence, supremacist or extremist groups, or drug use are prohibited. Tattoos in languages
other than English depicting words or phrases that, when translated into English, a reasonable person
would consider offensive are also prohibited. In the application of this Policy consideration will be given
to work, health and safety, cultural and/ or ethnos, and religious issues where appropriate.
All body art will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis
5.0 EXEMPTIONS UNDER THIS POLICY
The definition of body art and modification as defined under this Policy is not intended to capture forms
such as:
e Standard cosmetic tattoos (e.g.) eyebrow tattoos)
e Standard ear piercing
6.0 RIGHT OF AN APPEAL
Candidates who are advised by the Second Division Officer in charge of the Recruitment and Selection
Office, that they did not satisfy the body art and modification standards outlined in this Policy, and who
are subsequently eliminated from the Recruitment and Selection Process, may indicate their intention to
appeal within seven (7) days from the date of such decision.
Upon receiving a candidate’s intention to appeal, an Appeal Board shall be seated to hear and determine
the appeal resulting from the decision of the Second Division Officer in charge of the Recruiting and
Selection Office. At the appeal, the Board may confirm or overturn the decision of the Second Division
Officer in charge of the Recruitment and Selection Office. The Appeal Board shall consist of officers as
determined by the Recruiting and Selection Officer.
PART IJ — NIL
Commissioner of Police
