Police Orders by Mr. Trevor Paul
Commissioner of Police
Police Administration Building
Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
Port of Spain
Tuesday 3™ January 2006
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian employees of the Police Service and is
not for publication in the Press)
No.10 Departmental Order PART | —NIL
PART Il
ti INFORMATION:

2.1 The establishment of human resource management units in the public sector aims
at transforming the way in which human resources are managed. Unlike Personnel Management,
Modern Human Resource Management (HRM) seeks to achieve the best fit between the
employee and the organisation. Ultimately, the processes employed focus on attracting,
developing and maintaining a well-motivated group of employees with the highest levels of
professionalism and integrity. Activities include Human Resource Planning, Human Resource
Development and Employee Relations.

The Cabinet Minute No. 2701 dated September 23", 2004 approved the following Human
Resource Positions to establish a decentralised HR Unit within the Trinidad and Tobago Police
Service:

i One (1) Director

ii Six (6) Senior Human Resource Officers

ili Five (5) Human Resource Officer III

iv Six (6) Human Resource Officer II

Vv Four (4) Human Resource Officer I

2.2 | HUMAN RESOURCE DIRECTOR - appointment of:

On September 19th 2005, Mrs. Hetty Mohammed Libert was appointed to act in
the position. The director occupies office on the fourth floor Police Administration
Building Port of Spain. Telephone No:627-6554

2. INTENTION:
This order is intended to apprise members of the Police Service of the role and functions
of the Director, Human Resource Management. This D.O. rescinds D.O. No.81 of 2000.


--- page break ---

10/02
a METHOD:

3.1 MANDATE:

The Human Resource Director is charged with the responsibility of ensuring that strategic

human resource management needs of the Rolice Service are identified and addressed

effectively.

3.2. CORE FUNCTIONS:

3.2.1 The Human Resource Director’s Core Functions are:

i To plan, direct and co-ordinate the activities of the Police Service to maximise the
strategic use of human resources and maintain functions such as human resource
planning and organizational development, human resource development and
Industrial and Employee Relations.

il To advise the Commissioner of Police on matters pertaining to financial
management, provision of human resource services, management of the physical
work environment and the management of the Human Resource and Information

7 Systems (HRIS).

lil To ensure that the Human Resource Management initiatives of the Police Service
are aligned with its strategic plan.

3.3.2 Duties of the Human Resource Director include:

i To allocate human resources, ensuring appropriate matches between personnel
and their functional areas of responsibilities.

li To ensure the administering of compensation benefits and the performance
appraisals management system

ili To ensure that systems are developed to inform employees about HR policies, job
functions, terms and conditions of service, working conditions, opportunities for
promotion and employee benefits.

iv To plan and conduct new employee orientation to foster positive attitude toward
organizational objectives.
2


--- page break ---

10/03

Vv To advise line managers on organizational human resource policy matters such as
performance management, and promotions and recommend needed changes.

vi To serve as a link between management and employees by interpreting and
administering contracts and resolving work-related problems.

vii To plan, direct, supervise and coordinate work activities of subordinates and staff
relating to Human Resource Planning and Organizational Development, Human
Resource Development and Industrial and Employee Relations.

viii To analyze training needs to design employee development, training and health
and safety programs.

Xx To analyze statistical data and reports to identify and determine causes of
personnel problems and to develop recommendations for improvement of
organization’s personnel policies and practices.

xl To liaise with line managers to determine Human Resource Management needs
and to ensure the appropriateness of the measures adopted.

xii To review policies and develop strategies for the recruitment and selection of
employees. 2

xiii To participate in the selection of personnel (public and police officers) for the
staffing of the Police Service.

xiv To prepare annual draft estimates of expenditure for Training and Development,
and other HR Programmes and the Human Resource Management Unit.

xv___ To represent the Police Service on committees and at meetings on Human
Resource Management matters.

xvi __ To serve as a resource person at conferences, seminars and workshops.

4, COMMUNICATION:

4.1 REPORTING RELATIONSHIPS:

4.1.1 To report directly to the Commissioner of Police and seek his approval for all
human resource management matters.

« 4.1.2 To collaborate with the Deputy Commissioner of Police, “Strategic Planning and

Development’ and the Assistant Commissioner of Police, ‘Community Relations’
on all Human Resource Management initiatives.


--- page break ---

4.1.3. To collaborate with Deputy Commissioners of Police and Assistant
Commissioners of Police on Human Resource matters.

4.1.4 To collaborate with Human Resource Management Director, General
Administration with the aim of sharing critical human resource information,
policy formulation and implementation.

4.2 KEY RELATIONSHIPS:

4.2.1. Liaise with Heads of Divisions/Branches/Sections/Units and line managers of the
Police Service to determine Human Resource Management needs.

4.2.2 Liaise with Executive Officers of Employee Staff Association on matters relative
to employee welfare.

4.2.3. Liaise with the Director, Human Resource Ministry of National Security, Human
Resource Management Association of Trinidad and Tobago, Industrial Relations
Organizations, both local and foreign and other relevant agencies.

PART III — NIL
7 Police
4
