No. 121 
Police Orders by Mr. James Philbert 
Commissioner ofPolice (Ag.) 
Police Administration Building 
Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets 
Port of Spain 
Monday 23rd June 2008 
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian 
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press) 
Departmental Order PART I - NLL 
PART II 
Establishment of a Justice Protection Unit 
1. INFORMATION 
1: 1 The management of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service has established a Justice Protection 
Unit as part of its crime fighting initiative in the effective management of the Police Service. 
1 :2 This new unit is part of the Police Service ongoing transformation process aimed at building a 
professional organization . 
1 :3 The sanctioned strength of the unit comprises of:-
ASP Insp. Sgt. Cpl. Const. Total 
] 2 4 10 120 137 
1:4 In keeping with the requirement of the Justice Protection Regulations 2000, the functions of 
the Investigative and Protective Agencies shall be performed by the Police Service. 
1:5 Under the Justice Protection Act of2000 : -
"Administrative Centre" or "Centre" means the Department or Ministry charged with the 
responsibility for the development , management and maintenance of the Justice Protection 
Programme; 
"Approved authority or authority" means 
(a) the Attorney General; 
(b) the Director of Public Prosecutions ; 
(c) the Administrative Centre; 
(d) the Commissioner of Police; 
(e) any other person or body that the Minister may, from time to time, designate as an 
approved authority. 
"Investigative Agency" means the Agency charged with the functions set out in Section 9; 
.. ./2 



121/2 
"Participants" mean witnesses, jurors, judicial officers, legal officers , law enforcement 
personnel, associates of such persons and other persons to whom protection or assistance or both 
is given under the Justice Protection Programme . 
"Protective Agency" means the Agency charged with the functions set out in section 11 
2. INTENTION 
2:1 The intention of this order is to apprise members of the Police Service of the establishment of the 
Justice Protection Unit with responsibilities for investigating and protecting participants and 
prospective participants under the Programme . 
3. METHODOLOGY- RESPONSffiiLITIES 
3:1 Investigative Agency shall: -
(a) Investigate a prospective participant for possible inclusion in the Programme and submit 
to the Administrative Centre , the application in the prescribed form accompanied by the 
foJiowing documents:-
(i) an assessment of that application ; 
(ii) a threat assessment including a prison report where the participant is in prison; 
and 
(iii) a risk assessment . 
(b) Provide protection for the prospective participant in the period prior to the determination 
ofwritten assessments from : -
(i) the Investigative Agency ; 
(ii) the Director ofPublic Prosecutions ; and 
(iii) the Protective Agency ; 
(c) In case of emergency , apply to the Administrative Centre for provisional entry into the 
Programme by the prospective participant prior to the determination referred to at (b). 
3 :2 Protective Agency shall: -
(a) Submit a report to the Administrative Centre on the suitability of a prospective 
participant for entry into the Justice Protection Programme and for that purpose shall: 
(i) interview the prospective participant with a view to establishing his suitability for 
entry into the programme ; 
(ii) examine the threat and risk assessments submitted to the Administrative Centre; 
and 
(iii) require a prospecti ve participant or a participant , as the case may be, to undergo, 
for the purpose of determining his physical and mental health, medical tests or 
examinations and psychological or psychiatric evaluations and to authorize the 
results to be made available to the Protective Agency ; 
.. ./3 



!ment 
jon 11 
ective 
shall: 
12113 
(b) Protect participants and persons accorded provisional entry; 
(c) Relocate participants where necessary~ and 
(d) Carry out periodic reviews of threat and risk assessments. 
4. ADl\UNISTRA TION 
4:1 The Deputy Commissioner ofPoJice cstrategic Planning and Development is responsible for the 
overall management and operations of the unit. 
4:2 Head of the Homicide Bureau shall be responsible for the day to +day operations of the unit. 
Members of the Unit shall perfo rm Investi gative and Protective duties only unless otherwise 
directed by Deputy Commissioner of Police "Strategic Planning and Development''. 
4:4 Deputy Commissioner ofPolice "Strategic Planning and Development" may make administrative 
policies for the proper management of the unit. 
5. COMMUNICATION 
5:1 Deputy Commissioner of Police "Strategic Planning and Development shall apprise the 
Commissioner of Police on a monthly basis on the management, development and operation of 
the unit. 
5:2 Head of the Homicide Bureau shall submit a monthl y return on the performance ;of the unit. 
CONCLUSION 
The management of the Police Service is in the process of transformation to create a professional 
organization where by members are committed to the delivery of quality service. 
As such, the establishment of this new unit will immensely enhance the crime fighting capabilities of the 
Police Service in a time where witnesses are refusing to testify in court for fear of their Jives, thereby 
causing the matters to be dismissed and the accused sei free. 
PART ill - NIL 
I uJ /;:, t~ :ic;; rtJ ~~sstoner of Pohce 