ce) Police Orders by Mr. Gary Griffith
baat Commissioner of Police
te Police Administration Building
KOK Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
7% st
Prorecr ano Monday 21*' September, 2020
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
No. 141 Departmental Order PARTS I&II-NIL
PART II
PROMOTION ADVISORY BOARD
The following Departmental Orders have been rescinded with immediate effect: -
No. 211 dated 20" November, 2007
No. 213 dated 29" November, 2007
No. 174 dated 16" September, 2010
No. 13 dated 20" January, 2020.

1. INFORMATION

1:1 In accordance with the requirements of the Police Service Act 2006, as amended by Act No 13 of
2007, the management of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service established the Promotion Advisory
Board (P.A.B.) on 20" November, 2007.

1:2. The Board shall conduct interviews and make recommendations to the Commissioner of Police in
relation to promotions to the rank of Corporal, Sergeant and Inspector.

1:3 The Promotion Advisory Board (PAB) shall comprise five (5) members namely: -

a) A Deputy Commissioner of Police, who shall be the chairman;

b) An Assistant Commissioner of Police;

c) The Director Human Resources of the Police Service;

d) A senior officer, who is not a police officer, from the Ministry of National
Security, selected by the Minister; and

e) An independent management consultant, appointed by the Commissioner.

1:4 The Commissioner shall engage a person who is not a Police Officer as Secretary to the Board.

1:5 The appropriate recognized association may nominate a representative to be present as an
observer at sittings of the Board.

1:6 The Secretary to the Board shall keep a record of the ratings given to every police officer who
appears before the Board.

1:7. The Board shall sit as often as it thinks necessary, but at least once every three months to consider
promotions and notice of each sitting shall be given in a timely manner to the representative
referred to in 1.5.

2. INTENTION

2:1. The intention of this order is to apprise members of the Police Service of the establishment of the
Promotion Advisory Board


--- page break ---

141/2 )
3. METHODOLOGY - Promotion in the Second Division
3:1 The Promotion Advisory Board shall interview: -
a) an officer who has passed the qualifying examination for promotion and is recommended for
promotion by the officer in charge of his Division or Branch;
b) an officer who was allocated fifty (50) or more points at the previous interview; and
c) an officer who is eligible under para.3 :3
3:2. An officer shall not be interviewed by the Board unless he has been allocated forty or more
points by the Board based on the criteria, other than the interview, listed in 3:5
3:3 Subject to 3:2, an officer who is allocated less than sixty points is eligible to be interviewed at
the next sitting of the Board.
3:4 Every officer considered for promotion shalt be rated according to the criteria specified in 3:5
and each officer who is allocated sixty or more points shalt be placed on an Order of Merit List.
3:5. The criteria mentioned in 3:4 shall be as follows:
CRITERIA MAXIMUM POINTS
° Performance Appraisal 40
° Interview 25
° Examination 35
3:6 At the conclusion of each sitting of the Board, the Chairman shall submit to the Commissioner
the Board's recommendations in the form of an Order of Merit List.
3:7 The Commissioner may discuss with the Board any recommendation made in the Order of Merit
List.
3:8 | The Commissioner shall cause the Order of Merit List to be published in a Departmental Order.
and it shall be valid for the period of one (1) year from the date of its publication
3:9 The Commissioner may extend the validity of the Oder of Merit List before its expiration for a
period not exceeding one (1) year
3:10 A Police Officer is entitled to apply to the Board to be informed in writing of his ratings.
4. PERFORMANCE APPRAISAL
4:1 An officer may be awarded the following points based on his performance appraisal grades.
GRADES MEANING POINTS
1 Outstanding 40
2 Very Good 32
3 Good 24
4 Fair 16
3 Unsatisfactory 8
Ee


--- page break ---

141/3 |

-. EXAMINATION MARK

5:1 Officers in the Second Division who have successfully passed the qualifying examination in
English Language, or who have been exempted from writing the qualifying examination in
English Language shall be awarded Thirty-Five (35) points.

5:2 With immediate effect a Constable, Corporal or Sergeant who is successful in examinations, will
be awarded points that are directly proportionate to their examination marks (percentage)
received.

5:3. A Constable or Corporal, will be required to write three (3) components in a promotion
examination namely English Language, Law and Police Duties. Points awarded in each of the
components shall be added together and divided by the number of subjects taken to get the
average marks (percentage) to be allocated to him.

5:4 A Sergeant, will be required to write one (1) component in the promotion examination to the rank
of Inspector, namely Business Communications. The marks awarded to that officer in the
examination shall be divided by the total marks of the examination and multiplied by thirty-five
(35) points, which represent the maximum points for examination marks as stated in Regulation
20(5) of the Police Service Regulations, 2007, to get the points to be allocated to him.

6. EXEMPTION

6:1 All requests for exemptions from writing components of the promotional examination as stated in
5:1 and 5:3 must be submitted in writing to the Police Service Examination Board for their
consideration. Such exemptions shall only be applied from the year of submission. .

6:2 Officers in the Second Division who are holders of a Bachelor of Laws Degree (LLB) from an
institution recognised by the Accreditation Council of Trinidad and Tobago, must apply in writing
to be exempted from writing the Law Component of the examination for promotion to the ranks
of Corporal and Sergeant.

7. ADMINISTRATION

7:1. Heads of Divisions/Branches shall ensure that all Performance Appraisal Reports are properly
prepared and submitted in a timely manner.

7:2. Heads of Divisions/Branches shall be required to make recommendations for promotion of
officers under their command on the Candidate Assessment Form

: The recommendations shall be accompanied by a copy of the officers Performance Appraisal
Report, certified by the Head of Division/ Branch.

8. COMMUNICATION

8:1 Heads of Divisions/Branches shall be required to attend an orientation session in order to
familiarize themselves with the new promotion system for promotion within the Second Division.

8:2 Heads of Divisions/Branches shall in turn hold orientation sessions in the Division/Branch to
educate officers of the new promotion system for promotion within the Second Division.

8:3. Heads of Divisions/Branches shall adhere strictly with requirements of this Order.


--- page break ---

141/4 |

9. ATTIRE AND APPEARANCE

9:1 Police Officers are reminded of the need to dress appropriately to attend interviews of the Board.

9:2 All Police Officers (unless authorized to wear plainclothes) shall appear before the Board attired
in Patrol Order number I

9:3. Police Officers who are authorized to wear plain clothes shall appear before the Board properly
attired. Male officers shall wear sober-coloured lounge suit and tie whilst female officers shall
wear business attire.

10. CONCLUSION

10:1 The system outlined in this order is designed to identify, select and promote the most efficient
and effective officers to leadership positions thus ensuring that the foundation is laid for effective
succession planning.

10:2. Succession planning is the benchmark of effective management. The development of our human
resource is necessary for the continued growth and improvement of the organisation. The
conceptualisation of a more efficient, productive and effective Police Service has manifested
itself in the transformation process currently being undertaken throughout the service. A
promotion system based on merit is an essential part of this process.

Commissioner of Police
