No. 100 
Police Orders by Dr. D. Gibbs 
Commissioner of Police 
Police Administration Building 
Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets 
Port of Spain 
Wednesday 25th May 2011 
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian 
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press) 
Departmental Order PART I-NIL 
PARTll 
POUCE ACADEMY ADMINISTRATIVE AND MANAGEMENT STRUCTURE 
The Trinidad and Tobago Police Service (TIPS) has entered a period of transformation in pursuit of its 
vision: 
'To be the National Provider of Professional Policing Services' . 
Integral to achieving our vision is the necessity to provide for the continuous training, education and 
development of all sworn and non-sworn members of the Police Service in a timely, efficient and effective 
manner. 
The Police Academy, traditionally, has been the main provider oftraining and development to officers of the 
Trinidad and Tobago Police Service. Throughout the history of the TTPS the Police Academy (previously 
known as the Police Training Academy and the Police Training College) has met the needs of the Police 
Service through the delivery of basic and in-service training, as required. Much of this training has been 
delivered in a paramilitary setting and none more so than the Academy's flagship program, the Induction 
Program, through which every member of the TTPS must pass to enter the Service. 
In recent years the main focal point of training continued to be the Induction Program. Conversely, the 
delivery of in-service developmental programs waned in comparison and to a point where the TTPS presently 
finds itself in a deficit situation regarding the training and development of all members of the Service. 
In response, the TIPS established the position of Provost with responsibility for the overall administration 
and operation of the Academy, to address and resolve these issues (D.O. 191 - 2009 refers). 
The Provost's mandate includes the development and customization of: 
" ... ... a modem, leading edge police training programme for delivery to recruits 
and in-service officers in Trinidad and Tobago. The intent is to ensure that the 
Police Academy becomes a regional leader in police training, and has best 
practices and procedures that are commensurate with training academies in 
developed countries. " 



As a result, the Academy is also in a period of transformation to achieve the mandate set out by the office of 
the Commissioner of Police and the government of Trinidad and Tobago. 
Society has changed and so too has policing in developed nations. As the national police service in Trinidad 
and Tobago responsible for the safety and security of our citizens and residents, we too must change and 
embrace new practices, initiatives and embrace technology to keep pace with society in an ever changing and 
challenging environment. 
The first phase of change has already begun at the Police Academy and progress to date includes the: 
• Revision of the Induction Program curriculum ; 
• Revision of the Induction Program intake model that allows for the doubling of new recruits 
entering the service annually; 
• The reintroduction of in-service training through the establishment of an Advanced Programs 
and Services Unit; 
• The establishment of a Police Leadership Development Program; 
• The reintroduction of a Field Training Program ; 
• The establishment of a separate unit for SRP and other Law Enforcement training programs ; and 
• The establishment of a Curriculum Development , Research and Accreditation Unit. 
ESTABLISHMENT OF MANAGEMENT STRUCTURE, POLICE ACADEMY 
1. To support the continuous and expedient requirement for transformation at the Police Academy the 
following management structure is established effective June 1 "', 2011. 
a. The Provost, Police Academy, is the person responsible for the overall operations and 
administration of the Academy and has authority to direct all personnel assigned to the 
Academy for the purposes of achieving the (Provost's) mandate as described herein and as 
cited in D.O. 191 - 2009. 
b. The position of Administrative Officer, Police Academy, is established and will be held by the 
senior TTPS officer assigned to the Academy . The Administrative Officer is responsible to 
and reports directly to the Provost on an matters. 
c. The position of Director, Police Academy, IS established for each of the following 
administrative, operational and service units: 
1. Basic Training Programs 
11. Advanced Programs and Services 
111. Police Leadership Development Programs 
1v. Field Training Programs 
v. Curriculum Development , Research and Accreditation 
v1. Administration, Recruiting and Armoury Services; and 
v11. Facilities Management and Services 



The position of Director, Police Academy, may be held by a sworn or non-sworn member of 
the TTPS and reports directly to the Provost on all matters under their respective authority. 
d. The foJiowing positions are established for the Induction Programme and replace the previous 
positions of Inspector School, and Inspector Drill: 
1. Head, Academic Programs 
11. Head, Police Skills 
m. Head, Driver Training 
tv. Head, Health and Wellness; and 
v. Head, Administration 
The position of Head, as identified at (i) to (v) above, will report directly to the Director, Basic 
Training Programs, who will report to and advise the Provost on all matters related to the 
Induction Program faculty, staff: trainees and program delivery accordingly. 
e. Directors will be supported in the program or service discipline they are responsible for 
through the assistance of Program Managers, Assistance Program Managers and other 
necessary staff who will report to their respective Director accordingly. 
2. A Police Academy Management Committee is established and will be inclusive of the following 
positions: 
a. The Provost, who will act as Chair of the Management Committee 
b. The Administrative Officer, Police Academy 
c. All Directors, as noted in I .e. above; and 
d. The Executive Assistant to the Provost will act as the Executive Secretary, Management 
Committee, for the purpose of arranging and facilitating meetings, recording of minutes, and 
following up on matters with Committee members as directed by the Provost. 
The Provost will appoint a Vice Chair of the Management Committee on a rotational basis, at his 
discretion, and who will chair the meetings in his absence. 
3. The Organization Chart attached at Appendix 'A' to this Departmental Order represents the Police 
Academy Administrative and Management Structure of the Police Academy, effective May 24, 2011. 



Appendix 'A' 
Police Academy Administration and Organizational Structure (Established 24 May 2011) 
Office of the Provost 
1 
Executive Assistard Administrative Officer 
to the Provost Police Academy 
I J I J I I 
Director Director Director Director Director Director Director 
Basic Training Programs Advanced Programs and Services Field Training Programs Leadership Development Program Curriculum Development, Research Adm i nistr~ion , Recruiting Facilities Managemerd 
including Annual Qualification and Accreditation and Armoury Services and Services 
I 
I I I 
I 
I I I I I 
Head Manager Program Managers Program Manager Program Manager Research Staff Head Armoury Cafetaria Services 
Academic Programs SRP Program & Advanced Programs Field Training Program Leadership Developmerd Recruiting Services Services (contract) 
Law Enforcement Prog Annual Qualification Inspector 
I J l I I I I I 
Head Ass'! Program Manager Ass1 Program Mgrs I 
I 
Clerical assistant 
I 
Clerical assistant 
I 
Curriculum I I Recru~ing OffiCers I I Armoury Staff 
I I 
Maintenance Staff 
I Pollee Skills Advanced Programs Developmerd staff 
I I I I I I I 
I 
Head 
I I Cleri.cal assistant I Clerical assistant I I Clerical assislant I Background Check I I 
Armoury 
I 
Janitorial Staff 
I Driver Training Investigators Procuremeri 
I I I I 
I Head .1 Clerical assislants I I Clerical asssistant 
I 
Labourers 
I Heahh and Well ness 
I 
Head 
Administration 
Induction Program 