Ks) Police Orders by Mr. Gary Griffith
SAY Commissioner of Police
. OK ; Police Administration Building
Bean «Tonio Pouce seme Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
70, oot Port of Spain
PROTECT AND p
ares Friday July 12, 2019
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian employees of the Police
Service and is not for publication in the Press or for distribution in the public domain)
No.126 Departmental Order PART I- Nil
PART II
The Introduction of the Use of GAS LESS LETHAL Force by the Guard and Emergency
Branch (GEB) of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service
II. POLICY
It is the policy of the Guard and Emergency Branch (GEB) that personnel use only the amount of
physical force reasonable and necessary to arrest, apprehend, or restrain a suspect. Force may also
be used in defense of self and others.
The level and amount of force which an officer uses must be reasonably necessary to accomplish
the law enforcement objective. The force used must be “objectively reasonable” in each given
situation. The factors which, in general, enter into a determination as to whether force was used
“objectively reasonable” include:
i. The severity of the alleged crime at issue;
ii. Whether the suspect poses an imminent threat to the safety of officers and/or others;
and
iii. Whether the suspect is actively resisting or attempting to evade arrest by flight.
In making a determination as to the reasonableness of force, courts recognize that law enforcement
officers may have to make split-second decisions and reactions. That necessity is taken into
consideration. Recognizing our legal and moral obligations to use force wisely and judiciously, it
is the policy of the Guard and Emergency Branch that deadly force shall never be resorted to until
every other reasonable means of apprehension or defense has been exhausted.
126/1


--- page break ---

Il. DEFINITIONS

A. Excessive Force: The use of more force than is reasonable and necessary to arrest, apprehends,

or restrains a suspect. The use of excessive force will not affect the validity of the arrest. It will

however expose the officer to civil suit, discipline or both and, in aggravated circumstances,
possible criminal liability.

B. Deadly Force: The definition of deadly force applied by the police is the use of any means or

instrumentality intended to or likely to cause death. An officer may use deadly force when he/she

believes it is necessary to prevent death or great bodily harm to himself/herself or to others.

Therefore, the justification for deadly force is the immediate threat of death or great bodily harm,

but the application of deadly force is that action which is likely to cause death.

C. Less-Lethal Force Philosophy: A concept of planning and force application, which meets

operational objectives, with less potential for causing death or great bodily harm than conventional

police tactics.

D. Less-Deadly Force: Any use of force other than that which is considered deadly force.

E. Conducted Energy Weapon: A \ess-lethal force weapon utilized by trained personnel that

causes Electro-Muscular Disruption (EMD) to a combative or potentially combative subject. The

use of this device is intended to incapacitate the subject with a minimal potential for causing death
or great bodily harm.

IV. APPLICATION

This policy and procedure shall apply to all Officers of the Guard and Emergency Branch.

Whenever physical force is used by an officer in the performance of his/her duties, that officer

shall complete a detailed incident report documenting the specific force used and the outcome of

the event in which the force was used.

V. MEDICAL ASSISTANCE REQUIREMENT

All Branch personnel who engage in the use of deadly or less-deadly force within the scope of

their employment shall:

A. Check the subject for injuries and administer first aid to their level of training if required.
First aid shall include but is not limited to treatment for Gas exposures and the use of a
conducted energy weapon.

B. Summon an ambulance, paramedics, rescue unit, or appropriate medical aid if necessary.

126/2


--- page break ---

C. Maintain close personal observation and keep in close physical contact with the subject while
continuing to provide first aid while the subject is in your custody.
D. All Officers are to monitor all subjects involved in the use of force contacts for positional
asphyxia whenever physical restraint is applied to the subject.

VI. USE OF LESS LETHAL FORCE
A. Officers may use only the amount of physical force necessary to consummate an arrest based
on probable cause for a violation of the Laws of Trinidad and Tobago.
Necessary force may also be used in the apprehension of a violent, emotionally or mentally
disturbed person, or in the subduing and restraining of an unruly, combative or abusive person.
While the use of reasonable physical force may be necessary in situations which cannot be
otherwise controlled, force may not be resorted to unless other reasonable alternatives have been
exhausted or would clearly be ineffective under the particular circumstances. Officers are
permitted to use whatever force is reasonable and necessary to protect themselves or others from
physical harm. The use of excessive and unwarranted force or brutality will not be tolerated under
any circumstances and may subject the officer to disciplinary action, criminal and civil liability.
The failure of an officer to prevent the use of excessive force by another officer or failure to report
the use of excessive force by another officer may subject the officer to disciplinary action, criminal
and civil liability.
In utilizing the use of force, the following chronological steps shall be adhered to unless the
totality of circumstances requires utilizing more assertive measures pursuant to this policy.

1. Consider your reasons for interacting with the subject, i.e., do you have reasonable

suspicion, probable cause, etc.

2. Observe the subject’s actions/behavior upon initial involvement or approach.

3. Address the subject in a courteous professional manner. Present questions calmly and

directly.

4. If you desire to arrest the subject, advise them of your intention to arrest, and

direct them through dialogue to do what you want to effect the arrest.

5. If the subject ignores your command, utilize empty hand control.

6. If the subject resists arrest, assess the situation and call for assistance, continue to talk

to them, only now apply more active physical control.

126/3


--- page break ---

7. If the subject continues to resist, assume a self-defense posture. Attempt to regain
control, get subject stabilized and handcuff.
8. If the subject attempts to harm you or others, assume a self-defense posture; regain
control utilizing only the amount of force necessary. If the subject stops fighting, use only
the amount of force necessary to obtain compliance. (De-escalate)
B. USE OF OLEORESIN CAPSICUM (OC), CHLOROACE TOPHENONE (CN),
CHLOROBEMZALMALONONITRILE (CS) GAS
The use of OC, CN and CS Gases are authorized by law to quell riotous situations or if the officer
experiences active resistance or is threatened with physical harm by a suspect. Its proper use is to
impede a subject, not to cripple, maim or kill.
When Gases are used, the officer shall complete the Use of Force Report and submit it to his/her
supervisor by the end of the shift. The supervisor will review and forward the report to the Senior
Superintendent of the Division/Branch/Section within forty eight (48) hours of receipt.
VII. USE OF LESS-LETHAL FORCE
A. The use of a Conducted Energy Weapon may be used by trained personnel when a subject is
threatening to actively resist, or is actively resisting an officer and the subject poses an articulated
threat of harm to an officer or another person. It may also be used when the subject poses a threat
of harm to himself or herself such as self-inflicted injury or attempts suicide.

1. Officers may include in the decision to use this force option previous information known
to the officer at the time of the incident, including conduct or statements of the subject or
prior history of resistive or assaultive behavior.

2. Passive resistance without posing an articulated threat of harm to officers or others does
not permit the use of a conducted energy weapon.

B. An officer shall not brandish, display or threaten the use of a conducted energy weapon unless
he or she can reasonably conclude its use may become justified and is anticipated.
C. When a conducted energy weapon is issued to an officer, it shall be mandatory for that officer
to carry the weapon on his person whenever the officer responds to an incident, report, call for
service, etc.
D. The conducted energy weapon shall be worn on the officer’s weak side, i.e. the side opposite
to the officer’s firearm.

126/4


--- page break ---

E. In each instance when a conducted energy weapon is deployed in an incident, a determination
will be made regarding the need for lethal cover. Lethal cover shall be required in all cases where
the subject possesses a firearm, knife or other deadly weapon.
F. Branch (GEB) personnel who use a conducted energy weapon against a person shall ensure the
person is monitored for injury or need for medical treatment which should be given as soon as
practical after the person is under control.
G. If an adverse reaction to the conducted energy weapon occurs or if it appears that the subject is
in need of medical treatment or if medical assistance is requested by the subject, an officer shall
summons a Paramedic Unit to the scene. The Emergency Medical Personnel shall be allowed to
make an assessment of the person to administer aid and/or transport if necessary.
H. If the probes are imbedded in sensitive tissue areas, i.e. neck, face, groin, or the breast of a
female, officers shall arrange transport to a medical facility for removal. If the probes are imbedded
in other non-sensitive tissue areas, a trained officer may remove them according to procedures.
I. After the probes have been removed, they shall be handled as a biohazard and packaged
according to procedure. The package shall be disposed of in a prescribed biohazard container.
J. When a conducted energy weapon is used against a person or animal, the user shall notify an
on-duty supervisor and shall complete an incident report detailing the circumstances of the
incident.
K. The conducted energy weapon shall not be used in close proximity to open flammable liquids
or in other flammable or combustible environments.
L. When a conducted energy weapon is used, the officer must complete the Use of Force Report
and submit it to his/her supervisor by the end of the shift. The supervisor will review and forward
the report to the Senior Superintendent of the Division/Branch/Section within forty eight (48)
hours of receipt.
VIII. USE OF INTERMEDIATE WEAPONS
A. The baton, beanbags and form batons are to be considered intermediate weapons. Their proper
use are to impede a subject, not to cripple, maim or kill. The best target areas for intermediate
weapons are legs, wrists, forearms or lower abdomen.
WHEN SUCH A WEAPON IS USED, THE OFFICER WILL COMPLETE THE USE OF
FORCE REPORT AND SUBMIT IT TO HIS/HER SUPERVISOR BY THE END OF THE
SHIFT. THE SUPERVISOR WILL REVIEW AND FORWARD THE REPORT TO THE
SENIOR SUPERINTENDENT.

126/5


--- page break ---

LESS LETHAL FORCE
Less lethal force, by its very nature, is not intended to nor is it likely to cause death.
However, death may result depending on its use. The purpose of this section is to minimize
the likelihood that such use may result in death.
« Specialty Impact Munitions
Impact Munitions provide officers additional force options and enhances officer safety in
a variety of situations.
First responders and tactical officers use Specialty Impact Munitions (SIMs) for single and
multiple subject situations. SIMs may be used by officers in a variety of situations such as
confrontation with single violent subjects. SIMs may also be used for perimeter control
and to temporarily incapacitate barricaded subjects. SIMs however, are mainly used to
allow officers to escalate or de-escalate force in response to crowd control actions.
With the exception of riot conditions, SIMs will only be used when the use of deadly
force is already reasonably justified. However, an officer will not be required to use a
less lethal force option as a substitute for an otherwise justified use of deadly force. The
less lethal projectiles are not intended to penetrate the body.
SIMS will be issued to and used by members who are trained to use them.
Officers will not carry or utilize any less lethal weapon before successfully completing
Branch (GEB) approved training.
SIMs have a tremendous mental effect on an individual and are used with the intent to
cause pain and at times sufficient blunt trauma to disorient or incapacitate an individual.
The maximum desired effect of an impact munition is blunt trauma. The unintended and
undesirable outcome of an impact munition is penetration, which may result from a
combination of situations. In any use of SIMS, medical attention is advised.
=" 12 Gauge Specialty Impact Munitions
a. The bean bag round is authorized for use only by officers who have received
specialty impact munitions training approved by the Branch (GEB).
b. The Specialty Impact round is transparent and marked.
c. When loading Specialty Impact rounds the officer must visually inspect the round.
126/6


--- page break ---

d. When deploying Specialty Impact rounds the officer must, prior to discharge, alert
backup officers that they are “deploying bean bag”.
e. Accurate and effective deployment of the round varies in distance.
f. When officers use this device, appropriate medical attention must be obtained for
the suspect.
g. Only appropriately trained medical personnel shall remove the projectile.
h. Officers should avoid aiming at the head, neck and heart.
" Bean Bag 37MM
a. The 37MM Bean Bag round contains one silica sand-filled bag.
b. This is a pain compliance round for crowd control that is suitable in moderate
ranges of fire approximately 20-35 feet.
c. Outside of 35 feet, the round by nature of its design may not provide the necessary
accuracy or energy to be used as a target specific round.
d. This round may also prove valuable in riot situations where police lines and
protestors are in close proximity.
= Multi-Role Projectile Launcher
The SL-6 is a semi-automatic multi-role 37mm six shot revolver type spring motor driven
projectile launcher. This less than lethal weapon is capable of firing 37mm baton rounds
and 37mm chemical munitions (OC, CS, and CN).
a. SL6 is assigned to the GEB and is authorized for use only by personnel who have
received Branch-approved training on the multi-role projectile launcher.
b. The 37mm baton rounds are blunt trauma inducing rounds.
c. The safe range for deploying the rounds is a minimum distance of 5 meters.
d. Officers should avoid aiming at the head, neck, upper torso, and groin area.
e. When officers use the 37mm baton rounds, appropriate medical attention must be
obtained for the suspect.
= Foam Baton
126/7


--- page break ---

a. The Foam Baton is a 37MM round that contains three foam projectiles. It is
intended to be direct fired, but may be skip fired at the discretion of the operator.

b. As a pain compliance round for crowd control, this round is most suitable in close
to medium range of fire, approximately 15 to 30 feet.

@. For the incapacitation or distraction of single non-compliant or aggressive subjects,
this round is best suited at close to moderate distances, approximately 10 to 20 feet.

= 60, 45 or 32-cal Rubber Projectile Cartridges

a. The 60, 45 or 32cal Rubber Projectile Cartridges are 37MM rounds that contain
varying amounts of rubber projectiles.

b. It is intended to be direct fired at the discretion of the operator, but it is necessary
to keep the trajectory low so the projectile spread will not engage the subject above
the breast line.

c. This is a pain compliance round for crowd control and is most suitable at close to
medium ranges of fire, approximately 15 to 40 feet. At closer ranges, this round
may cause minor injuries.

= Rubber Baton

a. The Rubber Baton is a 40MM round that contains three rubber projectiles.

b. The Rubber Baton is intended to be skip fired but may be direct fired at the
discretion of the operator.

c. This is a pain compliance round for crowd control, it is most suitable at medium to
extended ranges of fire, approximately 30 to 60 feet.

d. Inside of 30 feet, this round may result in minor injuries.

=" Sting Grenade

1. This device is a pyrotechnic, hand deployed grenade containing 180/.32 inch projectiles
or 80 /45 cal. projectiles.

2. It is available with just the projectiles or with the projectiles and a complement of OC or

CS.

3. It is a pain compliance, distraction and disorientation device for crowd management.
4. Deployed as a ground burst or aerial burse per the discretion of the operator.
126/8


--- page break ---

5. Blast radius of up to 150' for projectiles and chemical agents.
6. Maximum effect device delivers four stimuli for psychological and physiological effect:
i. Rubber projectiles
ii. Light
iii. Sound
iv. Optional chemical agent
Note: The operator must be adequately trained in the use of Specialty Impact Munitions
and have a thorough understanding of the round and considerations for selecting shot
placement, such as level of threat, target distance, size and clothing.
X. INVESTIGATING INCIDENTS OF NON-DEADLY, LESS-LETHAL USE OF FORCE
The Shift Commander shall be responsible for the immediate review of an incident involving the
use of non-deadly, less-lethal force. The Shift Commander shall require the involved officer to
complete a detailed incident report, and shall provide a copy of the report to the Senior
Superintendent in charge of the Division/Branch/Section within forty eight (48) hours of receipt.
The Shift Commander shall insure that proper departmental procedures are followed during and
after the incident and shall take appropriate departmental action as required. Upon receiving this
preliminary report, the Senior Superintendent may request further investigation.
PART III - Nil
Commissioner of Police
126/9
