No. 133 
Police Orders by 
Commissioner ofPolice 
Police Administration Building 
Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets 
Port of Spain 
Wednesday 12th September 2012. 
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian 
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press) 
Departmental Order PART I-NIL 
PART II 
CEREMONIAL OPENING OF THE 2012/2013 LAW TERM OF THE SUPREME COURT OF 
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO 
INFORMATION 
1: I The Ceremonial Opening of the 2012/2013 Law Term of the Supreme Court of Trinidad 
and Tobago will take place on Monday 17\h September, 2012 . 
1 :2 The Programme will commence at 10.00 am with an Ecumenical Service at the Holy 
Trinity Cathedral, Abercromby Street, Port of Spain. 
1 :3 There will be a procession from the Holy Trinity Cathedral to the Hall of Justice, 
comprising the Honourable Chief Justice and Mrs. Archie and other members of the 
Legal Profession. 
1:4 The route of the procession is as follows:-
North along Abercromby Street and east along Knox Street to the Hall of Justice. 
1:5 A Guard ofHonour provided by members ofthe Trinidad and Tobago Defence Force will 
be required to form up on Knox Street in front of the Hall of Justice and will be inspected 
by the Honourable Chief Justice. 
1 :6 The Guard of Honour will then march past the Honourable Chief Justice and other 
members of the Legal Profession along Abercromby Street. 
2 INTENTION 
2: I The intention of this Order is to ensure that all members of the Police Service are 
properly briefed and aware of their role and function as it relates to their duties. Also, to 
provide adequate protection and security for all persons involved in this ceremony and to 
minimize any inconvenience caused to the travelling public . 
. . . .. ./2 



133/2 
3. METHOD 
3: I OPERA TlON GUARD FORMATION 
3: I: 1 The Guard of Honour shall fall in on Sackville Street between Edward and St Vincent 
Streets, at 10.45 am on Monday 17111 September,2012 and will march off east along 
Sackville Street, south along St. Vincent Street, east along Hart Street, north along 
Abercromby Street, east into Knox Street, and form up in front of the Hall of Justice. 
The Honourable Chief Justice shall then inspect the Guard of Honour . 
3: 1 :2 The Guard of Honour will then return to Sackville Street via east along Knox Street, 
north along Pembroke Street, west along Duke Street, south along Abercromby Street 
where the Chief Justice shall take the Salute (at the Abercromby Street entrance to the 
Hall) west into Knox Street, South along St. Vincent Street then west into SackvilJe 
Street, where they will be dismissed . 
3:2 PRESERVING ORDER DUTIES 
3:2:1 Members ofthe Trinidad and Tobago Police Service shall: 
3:2: l(a) Preserve order outside the Cathedral of the Holy Trinity, Hart Street and Abercromby 
Street, Port of Spain; along the route of the Procession; outside of and inside the precincts 
ofthe Hall of Justice. 
3:2:1(b) Control all traffic arrangements for this occasion outside the Cathedral of the Holy 
Trinity, along the route of the Procession, outside the Hall of Justice and preserve parking 
on Hart Street between Frederick and Abercromby Streets for members of the Legal 
Profession and other specially invited guests 
3:3 DUTIES/RESPONSffiiLITIES 
3:3: 1 Senior Superintendent, Port of Spain Division shall be responsible for the supervision of 
all personnel preserving order, except for those inside the Hall of Justice. 
3:3:2 Senior Superintendent, Port of Spain Division shall be responsible for arranging 
preserving order duties to be performed outside and in the environs of the Cathedral of 
the Holy Trinity, along the route to be taken by the procession and the Guard of Honour 
and on the compound and precincts of the Hall of Justice. 
3:3:3 Senior Superintendent, Court and Process Branch shall personally supervise all duties 
inside the Hall of Justice. He shall also arrange for an adequate strength of personnel 
under his command to preserve order inside the Hall of Justice and its immediate 
precincts for this occasion. 
3:3:4 Senior Superintendent, 'Traffic/Highway Patrol Branch' shall supervtse all traffic 
arrangements. 
3:3:5 Senior Superintendent 'Traffic/Highway Patrol Branch' shall decide on an adequate 
strength of personnel to be used for this occasion. 
3:3:6 Women Police Officers must be included in all preserving order duties . 
. . . . ./3 



133/3 
3:4 PARKING SACKVJLLE STREET/RESERVED PARKING 
3:4:1 No parking will be permitted on Sackville Street between Edward and St Vincent Streets, 
between and 6.00 am and 12.00 midday on Monday 17th September,2012. 
3:4:2 Alternative parking arrangements shall be provided . These arrangements are to be made 
by the Assistant Commissioner 'Mobile ', in conjunction with Senior Superintendent 
'Traffic/Highway Patrol Branch '. 
3:4:3 Reserve parking shall be provided on Hart Street between Frederick Street and 
Abercromby Street, for members of the Legal Profession and other specially invited 
guests. Persons using the reserve parking area shall be provided with Special Stickers , 
authorizing them to park thereat. An advance party must be detailed to secure the 
parking area. 
3:4:4 Parking is reserved on the eastern side of Edward Street between Queen and Sackville 
Streets for vehicles of the Trinidad and Tobago Defence Force and Police Service, 
conveying members of the Guard of Honour and the Police Officers detailed for 
preserving order and traffic duties. 
3:4:5 No vehicles are to be parked along the route to be used by the procession and the Guard 
of Honour. 
3:4:6 All vehicular traffic must be stopped on all routes to be used by the procession and Guard 
of Honour , during the time that such routes are in use. Alternative diversion must be 
arranged so as to minimize inconvenience to the travelling public. 
3:4:7 Police Wreckers are to be used to ensure strict enforcement ofthe Traffic Regulations 
made for this occasion. Motor Cyclists are to be detailed to patrol the outer area, to deal 
with any contravention of these Regulations . Also, to assist with any unusual congestion 
which might occur due to diversions. 
3:4:8 The widest possible publicity is to be given to these Regulations , including the alternative 
routes and diversions, so as to minimize the inconvenience that is likely to occur to the 
public. 
4. ADMINISTRATION 
4:1 GENERAL SUPERVISION 
4:1:1 Assistant Commissioner 'North/West ' shall be responsible for overall supervision of all 
preserving order duties for this event and shall be assisted by the Senior Superintendent 
Port of Spain Division. 
4:1 :2 Assistant Commissioner 'North/West ' in conjunction with Senior Superintendent , Port of 
Spain Division, shall decide on an adequate strength to be used for this occasion . The 
strength shall be provided from all Divisions under his supervision. 
4:1:3 Assistant Commissioner 'Mobile ' shall arrange for personnel from the Mounted Branch 
to form part of the preserving order party and escort the procession to the Hall of Justice . 
... ./4 



133/4 
4:2 ESCORT FOR HONOURABLE CHIEF JUSTICE 
4:2:1 Assistant Commissioner 'Mobile' is required to arrange to have a Motor Cycle escort for 
the Honourable Chief Justice from his residence, in time for his attendance at the formal 
Opening Ceremony. 
4:3 TRAFFIC CONTROL DUTIES 
4:3:1 Assistant Commissioner 'Mobile' shall in conjunction with Senior Superintendent 
'Traffic/Highway Patrol Branch', make appropriate arrangements for all parking and 
traffic control duties outside the Cathedral of the Holy Trinity, along the route of the 
procession of the Guard of Honour, and outside the Hall of Justice on the day of the 
Parade. 
4:3:2 It shaH be the responsibility of the Assistant Commissioner 'Mobile' to prepare and 
submit to the appropriate authority, the necessary Temporary Traffic Regulations which 
are to be enforced for this occasion on behalf of the Commissioner of Police. 
4:4 TRANSPORT 
4:4: I Assistant Commissioner 'Mobile' shall make arrangements with Superintendent 
Transport and Telecommunication Branch, to provide suitable transport for all members 
of the Police Service engaged in this exercise. 
4:5 DRESS 
4:5:1 Dress for this occasion shall be as follows:-
(i) 
(ii) 
First Division Officers 
and Inspectors 
Other Ranks 
4:6 TABLEOFEVENTS 
4:6:1 A table of events is attached as Appendix 'A'. 
Service Dress, 
Canes to be carried 
Patrol Order No. 1 
with Rain Cloaks 
4:6:2 A list of Judges of the Supreme Court of Judicature is attached as Appendix 'B'. 
4:6:3 Temporary Traffic Regulations is attached as Appendix 'C'. 
5. COMMUNICATION 
5:1 All First Division Officers and Inspectors engaged in this exercise shall carry Walkie 
Talkie Sets for communication. These sets shall be operated on Channel 5B. 
5:2 All Heads of Divisions I Branches in charge ofUnits performing duty for this Ceremonial 
Opening must publish an Operational Order outlining their duties and ensure that all 
personnel under their command are properly briefed as to their function pertaining to this 
event. 
.... .15 



133/5 
GENERAL 
The Ceremonial Opening of the Law Term of the Supreme Court of Trinidad and Tobago, is a 
very special occasion and every effort must be made by all members of the Police Service 
engaged in this exercise to ensure the safety of all dignitaries attending the Ceremony. 
Additionally, because the .function is taking place on a working day, every effort must be made 
to ensure that there is minimum disruption in the normal activities of the general public. 
Wherever possible, discretion should be exercised in a professional manner so as not to interfere 
with the efficient execution of police arrangements for this occasion. 
Officers are also reminded of their responsibility to citizens to ''Protect and Serve with Pride" 
and are to perform their duties with dignity. 
As a consequence, personnel are implored to be alert and vigilant while exercising tact, tolerance 
and courtesy in the performance of their duties. A display of efficiency and effectiveness can 
only win the highest praise of all and enhance the good image of the Trinidad and Tobago Police 
Service, in keeping with our 'Mission Statement' and ' Code of Conduct' . 
PARTID-Nll-



9:30 a.m. 
9:40 a.m. 
9:45 a.m. 
9:45 a.m. 
9:50 a.m. 
9:55 a.m. 
10:00 a.m. 
11:00 a.m. 
APPENDIX 'A' 
Magistrates , Members ofthe Industrial Court, Members of the Tax Appeal Board 
and Attorneys-at-law assemble in the compound of the Cathedral Church of the 
Holy Trinity, Abercromby Street, Port-of-Spain. 
The Honourable Judges of the Supreme Court and the Masters of the High Court 
join the assembly. 
The Honourable, The Chief Justice and Mrs. Archie arrive and are met by the 
Very Reverend Fr. Colin Sampson, Dean. 
Attorneys-at-law (in reverse order of seniority, the most junior first), followed by 
the Magistrates (in reverse order of seniority), masters of the High Court and the 
Honourable Judges of the Supreme Court (in reverse order of seniority), enter the 
Cathedral and take their seats. 
The Honourable Prime Minister and Dr. Bissessar arrive and are accompanied to 
their seats by the Honourable Chief Justice and Mrs. Archie and by the Very 
Reverend Fr. Colin Sampson, Dean. 
Their Excellencies, The President and Dr. Jean Ramjohn Richards arrive and are 
accompanied to their seats by the Honourable Chief Justice and Mrs. Archie 
and by the Very Reverend Fr. Collin Sampson. 
The congregation stands until they are seated. 
The Service of Devine Worship begins, conducted by the Inter-Religious 
Organization of Trinidad and Tobago. 
Note: A coUection will be taken during the service. 
The service ends. The procession leaves the Cathedral in the following sequence: 
Their Excellencies, The President and Dr. Jean Ramjohn Richards; 
The Honourable Prime Minister and Dr. Bissessar ; 
The Honourable Chief Justice and Mrs. Archie; 
The Acting President of the Senate; 
The Speaker of the House ofRepresentative; 
The Honourable Attorney General; 
The Honourable Justices of the Appeal; 
The Honourable Judges of the High Court; 
The Masters of the High Court; 
Magistrates; 
Attorneys-at-law. 
Their Excellencies depart. The Judges, Masters and Magistrates then proceed 
north along Abercromby Street and east into Knox Street, ending in front of the 
Hall of Justice. 



11:10 a.m. 
11:20 a.m. 
11:30 a.m. 
11 :50 a.m. 
12:00 noon 
The Honourable Judges of the Supreme Court and the Masters of the High Court 
proceed to their Chambers. Members of the legal profession and guests take up 
positions or seats on the steps of the Hall of Justice facing Knox Street and await 
the inspection of the Guard of Honour. 
The Honourable Judges of the Supreme Court and the Masters of the High Court , 
led by The Honourable The Chief Justice, assemble on the steps of the 
Hall of Justice facing Knox Street; The Honourable The Chief Justice inspects 
the Guard ofHonour. 
The Honourable The Chief Justice, the Honourable Judges of the Supreme 
Court and the Masters of the High Court assemble on the steps of the Hall of 
Justice facing Abercromby Street, where the Honourable Chief Justice takes the 
salute by the Guard ofHonour. 
Members of the legal profession and guests take their seats in the Convocation 
Hall of the Hall of Justice . 
The Honourable The Chief Justice and the Honourable Judges of the 
Supreme Court take their seats on the dais in the Convocation Hall. The 
Honourable The Chief Justice addresses the gathering, opens the 2012-2009 Law 
Term and adjourns Court . The Honourable The Chief Justice and the Honourable 
Judges of the Supreme Court rise. 
End of proceedings 



APPENDIX 'B' 
JUDGESOFTHE SUPREMECOURTOFJUrnCATURE 
Honourable Mr. Justice Tvor Archie 
Chief Justice and President of the Court of Appeal 
JUSTICES OF APPEAL 
Honourable Mr. Justice Kangaloo 
Honourable Mr. Justice Medonca 
Honourable Mme Justice Weekes 
Honourable Mr. Justice Jamadar 
Honourable Mme Justice Yorke-Soo Hon 
Honourable Mr. Justice Bereaux 
Honourable Mr. Justice Stollmeyer 
Honourable Mr. Justice Narine 
Honourable Mr. Justice Smith 
JUDGES OF THE HIGH COURT 
Honourable Mr. Justice Moosai 
Honourable Mr. Justice Tam 
Honourable Mme Justice Rajnauth-Lee 
Honourable Mr. Justice Holdip 
Honourable Mr. Justice Mohammed 
Honourable Mr. Justice Dean-Armorer 
Honourable Mr. Justice Carmona 
Honourable Mme Justice Gobin 
Honourable Mme Justice Jones 
Honourable Mme Justice Charles 
Honourable Mr. Justice Pemberton 
Honourable Mr. Justice Rampersad 
Honourable Mr. Justice Henderson 
Honourable Mr. Justice Rajkumar 
Honourable Mr. Justice Des Vignes 
Honourable Mr. Justice Kokaram 
Honourable Mr. Justice Boodoosingh 
Honourable Mr. Justice Mon Desir 
Honourable Mr. Justice Brown-Antoine 
Honourable Mr. Justice Devindra- Rampersad 
Honourable Mr. Justice R. Mohammed 
Honourable Mme Justice Ramkerrysingh 
Honourable Mr. Justice St. Clair-Douglas 
Honourable Mr. Justice Rahim 
Honourable Mr. Justice Aboud 
Honourable Mr. Justice Harris 
Honourable Mme Justice Lambert-Peterson 
Honourable Mme Justice Wilson 
Honourable Mr. Justice Seepersad 



MASTERS OF THE HIGH COURT 
Master Brenda Paray-Durity 
Master Patricia Sobion Awai 
Master Alexander 
Master Mohammed (Ag) 