Police Orders by Mr. James Philbert 
Commissioner of Police (Ag) 
Police Administration Building 
Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets 
Port of Spain 
Thursday 22nd October 2009 
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian employees of the Police 
Service and is not for publication in the Press) 
No 180 
INFORMATION 
Departmental Order PART 1- ~IL 
PART II 
SPECIALIST SECTIONS 
CLASSIFICATIONS AND ENTRY REQUIREMENTS 
The Trinidad and Tobago Police Service, in its thrust to effectively fulfil its mandate to protect 
and serve the public, has established as part of its structure, certain specialist sections which are 
charged with specific responsibilities, separate and apart from general police duties. 
An analysis of Police Officers' performance at promotion examinations and assessment 
interviews has however revealed that many of them, who have performed protracted duties in 
specialist sections, were unable to display a keen knowledge and understanding of various 
aspects of general police functions which are core facets of their duties and responsibilities. 
At the same time, numerous instances have arisen which demonstrate that certain officers may 
find themselves assigned to specialist sections, but they may not sufficiently exhibit the requisite 
skills or possess the aptitude to allow them to effectively function within those sections. Such 
inappropriate postings not only affect the smooth administration and operation of the section, but 
also have the propensity of exposing the officer and his colleagues to inordinate risk. 
These circumstances are untenable, at a time when the Service continues its mandate to engender 
greater public confidence. Therefore, there is a need to ensure that Officers who are assigned to 
specialist sections satisfy specific prerequisites. Additionally, sufficient opportunity must be 
given to allow those officers the opportunity to remain in touch with main stream functions and 
responsibilities. 
INTENTION 
The intention of this order is to identify and classify the various Specialist Sections within the 
Trinidad and Tobago Police Service, and codify the principles which shall be applied regarding 
assignment to those sections. 
ADMINISTRATION 
In order to capture aiJ the specialist sections alluded to above; three general classifications of 
"Specialist Sections" have been created. These classifications are premised upon the type of 
functions being carried out by those departments and the level of special prerequisites which 
would be required to ensure the integrity of those sections. 



180/2 
INTERPRETATION 
The classifications of Specialist Sections are as follows-
1. Class One Specialist Section: 
This refers to those sections which by their nature involve the carrying out of 
sensitive and classified functions, including high profile or confidential 
investigations, and may also involve regular intimate interaction with 
dignitaries/officials Assignments to these sections require that the officer undergoes 
specialised training and thorough assessments of aptitude . This class of Specialist 
Section shall include : 
• Anti Corruption Investigative Bureau 
• Complaints Division 
• Criminal Intelligence Unit 
• Criminal Investigation Department/Criminal Records Office 
• Crime and Problem Analysis Unit 
• Fraud Squad 
• Homicide Bureau of Investigations 
• Special Branch 
• Special Anti-Crime Unit 
• Organised Crime Narcotics and Firearm Bureau 
2. Class Two Specialist Section: 
This incorporates those sections which by their nature carry out 
investigative/operational functions at the forefront of the crime fighting initiative 
and/or specialised support functions. Assignment to these sections requires that the 
officer undergoes specialised training and thorough assessments of aptitude and 
fitness. This class of Specialist Section shall include : 
• Divisional Criminal Investigation Departments 
• Divisional Task Forces 
• E999 Rapid Response Branch 
• Guard and Emergency Branch 
• Inter Agency Task Force 
• Mounted and Canine Branch 
• Police Academy 



180/3 
3. Class Three Specialist Section: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
This consists of those sections which carry out general administrative/support 
functions. They may not necessarily require intense specialist training, but do require 
appropriate assessments of aptitude. This class of Specialist Section shall include: 
Audio Visual Unit 
Court and Process Branch 
Divisional Court Staff 
Divisional Offices 
Finance Branch 
Human Resource Branch 
Information Technology Unit 
Transport and Telecom . 
METHODOLOGY 
1. (a) A Police Officer shall have at least three years service to be considered for posting 
to any specialist section. 
(b) The Commissioner ofPolice may, for any Police Officer, waive the requirement 
for three years service. 
(c) An officer desirous of being considered for appointment to a Class One or Class 
Two Specialist Section shall submit an application in writing through the Head of his 
Division/Branch/Section to the Head of the specialist section to which he is desirous 
of being appointed. 
2. To be appointed to a Class One Specialist Section, a Police Officer shall be 
recommended by any suitably qualified Police Officer and shall undergo an 
assessment process which will include evaluations of his/her -
1. General performance during their policing career; 
11. Fitness as evidenced by his/her sick leave record; 
111. Results of a Polygraph Examination ; 
1v. Results of a Psychometric Evaluation ; 
v. Aptitude; and 
vt. Performance during an appropriate period of training at the specialist section . 
.. .4 



180/4 
3. The appointment of a Police Officer to a Class Two Specialist Section shall be 
determined based upon an assessment process which shall include evaluations of 
his/her -
t. General performance during their policing career; 
11. Fitness as evidenced by his/her sick leave record; 
111. Aptitude; and 
tv. Performance during an appropriate period of training at the specialist section. 
4. The appointment of a Police Officer to a Class Three Specialist Section shall be 
determined based upon the Police Officer 's general performance during his/her 
policing career and aptitude for the core functions of the Section. 
5. (a) A Police Officer who is assigned to a specialist section shall remain assigned to 
that section for no more than three (3) continuous years while in the same rank. 
(b) Where a Police Officer advances in rank during the three years prescribed in 
subparagraph (a), he/she may remain assigned to that section for no more than five 
(5) continuous years, inclusive of the period spent in the lower rank(s). 
(c) Notwithstanding subparagraph (a) and (b), the Commissioner of Police may 
extend the period of a Police Officer 's assignment to a specialist section. 
6. (a) Where the transfer of a Police Officer between specialist sections is being 
contemplated, that officer shall be required to satisfy the criterion provided for 
assignment to that section, whether or not the contemplated transfer is to another 
specialist section of the same classification as the section from which he/she is being 
transferred. 
(b) A Police Officer 's period of assignment to more than one specialist section shall 
be tallied together when applying the provisions of paragraphs S(a) and 5(b). 
7. (a) Upon a Police Officer 's transfer from a specialist section, he/she shall be required 
to perform general police duties in a line Division for at least two years before being 
considered for re-assignment to the same or any other specialist section. 
(b) A Police Officer 's initial period of re-assignment to a line Division shall include 
an appropriate period of re-orientation to allow the Officer the opportunity to again 
acclimatise him/herself with the responsibilities associated with general Police duties. 
AUTHORITY 
Regulation 193 (1) (b) ofthePolice Service Regulation s 2007 . 
PARTID-NIL ' 