Police Orders by Dr. Dwayne Gibbs 
Commissioner of Police 
Police Administration Building 
Comer Edward & Sackville Streets 
Port-of-Spain 
Monday 2nd July, 2012 
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian 
Employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press) 
No. 103 Departmental Order PARTI-NlL 
PART-II 
TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN ACT No. 14 of 2011 
1. INFORMATION 
According to the US Department of State, Trinidad and Tobago is seen as a potential 
transit, source and destination for the trafficking of persons. Over the past years an 
increasing number of reports and alerts have been made with regards to migrants from the 
Caribbean region, South and Latin America, Africa and Asia seeking both economic and 
social mobility who have allegedly illegally entered the territorial space of Trinidad and 
Tobago. 
Such a practice is supported by illegal circles of prostitution and allegations of forced­
labour which have resulted in the Government of Trinidad and Tobago enacting the 
Trafficking In Human Act No. 14 of 2011. The Act therefore gives effect to the United 
Nations protocol to prevent, suppress and punish trafficking in persons, especially the 
trafficking of women and children, thus supplementing the United Nations Convention 
against Transnational Organized Crime and for matters connected thereto. The Trinidad 
and Tobago Police Service (TTPS) is therefore mandated to ensure that the offences and 
related provisions are enforced to fu11y give life to the said Act. 
2. INTENTION 
The intention of this Order is to set rules and guidelines to all officers of the Trinidad and 
Tobago Police Service to be so informed of the Trafficking In Human Act of 2011 and to 
ensure full compliance with the Act. It is also intended to prescribe measures to prevent 
and combat trafficking in persons including children as outlined in the Act . 
...... ./2 



103/2 
3. D EFINITIONS 
The terms hereunder arc given the same meaning as described in the said Act: 
uexploitation " includes: 
Keeping a person in a state of slavery, subjecting a person to practices similar to slavery, 
compelling or causing a person to provide forced labour or services, the illicit removal of 
human organs, keeping a person in a state of servitude including domestic and se)...'Ual 
servitude, child pornography, the exploitation of the prostitution of another, engaging in any 
other form of commercial sexual exploitation including, but not limited to, pimping, 
pandering, procuring, profiting from prostitution and maintaining a brothel, causing a person 
to transport illegal items within or across borders and deriving a benefit through the abuse of 
another person. 
&&exploitation of the prostitution of others'' means the deriving by one person of monetary 
or other benefit through the provision of sexual services for money or other benefit by 
another person. 
"sexual exploitation" means compelling a person to engage in prostitution, the production 
of child pornography or other pornographic material or any other sexual activity. 
&tforced labour'' means labour or services obtained or maintained through force, threat of 
force, or other means of coercion or physical restraint. 
~"'Victlin "mcans a person against whom an offence is committed or against whom an offence 
is alleged to have been committed under this Act. 
&&child" means a person below the age of eighteen years. 
4. ADMINISTRATION 
CD Whenever a report or information comes to hand with respect to trafficking in persons or 
any other matter similar in nature; it shall be the duty of the Head of the 
Di\·ision/Section/Branch to appoint an investigator within a 2 4hour period to cause 
enquiries to be made mto such report. 
(ii) When there is evidence to support the initial report made, the victim shall be interviewed 
and where necessary all relevant documents must be seized and form part of the enquiry . 
...... ./3 



103/3 
(iii) Where an officer has reason to believe that a person is a victim of human trafficking the 
victim shall be taken and placed in protective custody pending the outcome of the 
investigation. 
(iv) Before any charges are proffered it shall be the duty of the investigating officer to 
communicate with the Immigration Department to determine the true status of the victim. 
(v) Where a person has been identified as a victim of human trafficking it shall be the duty of 
the investigating officer through the Divisional/Branch/Section Head to notify the Head of 
the relevant Embassy I Mission of such findings. 
(vi) As far as practicable all efforts must be made to communicate with the victim(s) and 
offender(s) in their native tongue when conducting an investigation. 
(vii) Where there is evidence that a victim has been physically abused it shall be the duty of the 
investigator to ensure that the victim receives medical attention as soon as possible and the 
medical certificate obtained. 
(viu) Where the victim is a female or child the investigator must ensure that a female police officer 
is present at all times during the course of the investigation. 
(ix) ln the case of a child a parent, guardian or social worker must be present during all 
interrogation and relevant entries made. 
7. TRAINING 
It shall be the duty of all Heads of Division/Branch/Section to ensure that all officers under their 
command are aucourant with the said Act and the content of this Order. As far as practicable he/ 
she is to ensure that officers under their command are trained in the investigation and prosecution 
of hwnan trafficking. The Police Academy shall schedule training relevant to human trafficking 
based on the said Act and on best practice. 
8. COMMUNICATION 
Officers are hereby informed of the importance of the "Human In Trafficking Act" No. 14 of 
2011 and special attention must be given to Parts IV & V of the said Act entitled: Crim inal 
Offence and Related Provisions. 
Victims of trafficking who are witnesses or potential witnesses shall be eligible for applicable 
witness relocation and protection programmes for victims of organized criminal activity or other 
serious offences. 
. .... ./4 



103/4 
Child victims of trafficbng, once identified as such, shall not be housed in prisons or other 
detention facilities for accused or convicted criminals under any circumstances. 
The Minister may designate any police officer to be an "authorized officer" for a specific period 
and purpose. This officer shall have all the powers invested in the Counter Trafficking Unit as 
stated in Section 12 of the said Act. 
General: 
The passage of this Act gives specific attention to the issues and breaches of the law as it relates 
to human trafficbng in Trinidad and Tobago and to the wider Caribbean. Trinidad and Tobago is 
deemed as a country "making significant efforts to bring itself into compliance with the 
minimum standards outlined in the United States: Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000." 
Officers are therefore asked to be mindful of the offences and the objectives as outlined in the 
said Act and the importance and relevance of the Act in the development of our nation. The 
contents of this Order must be fully communicated to all officers of the Trinidad and Tobago 
Police Service in form of lectures , training and briefings . 
~~NIL 
Commissioner of Police 