No.l16 
Police Orders by Dr. Dwayne Gibbs 
Commissioner of Police 
Police administration Building 
Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets 
Portof~ain 
Wednesday 25 July 2012 
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian 
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press) 
Departmental Order PART I - NIL 
PART II 
DUTY COUNSEL 
1. Section 8 of The Legal Ajd and Advice (Amendment) Act No.3 of2012 has amended the Legal Aid and 
Advice Act, Chap 7:07 by inserting inter alia after section 15, section 158. Subsection (1) states: 
158. (1) Where a suspect is detained, the seruor officer in charge of the police station or other 
place of detention shall, as soon as possible inform the authority of-
(a) the name of the suspect and where the suspect is a minor, the age of the suspect. 
(b) the nature of the offence; and 
(c) the location where the suspect is being detained. 
2. Therefore every time: 
a. an adult suspect is detained for a capital offence or 
b. a minor for any offence 
is detained and brought to station or other place of detention the senior officer in charge shall, as soon as 
possible inform the authority [Legal Aid & Advisory Authority] of the aforementioned. This duty 
entrusted to the seruor officer is mandatory and a very important one. 
3. 'Seruor officer in charge of the police station' is defined as either 
~ The Inspector in charge of the station; 
~ The Duty Sergeant; or 
~ The Second Division Officer in charge of the shift . 
. . . . . . ./2 



116/2 
4. The numbers for the Authority (Legal Aid & Advisory Authority] will be provided in the posters and 
subsequent notices. 
5. A Duty Counsel shall be assigned to the suspect detained at station and the senior officer shall make all 
necessary effort to have same communicate with the suspect. 
6. The senior officer shall log all calls made to the Legal Aid and Advisory Authority in this regard, in the 
relevant telephone message book. The message should include the name of the suspect and the nature of 
the offence. 
7. A weekly return must be sent to the officer in charge of the division for onward transmission to the 
Commissioner of Police via the reporting channel. It must capture the following data: 
};> Name of the officer in charge of the station; 
};> The name and age of the detainee; 
);> Date and time of detention; 
);> The offence the suspect was detained for; 
};> The station location of the detainee; 
};> Whether the detainee was charged or released; 
};> Date and time call was made to the Authority; 
);> Who received the call at the Authority; 
};> What information was given; 
);> Whether or not a call was received from the Authority indicating that a Duty Counsel was 
assigned; 
);> Whether or not the Duty Counsel visited the detainee; 
);> Whether a duty certificate was issued by the Authority to the Duty Counsel; and 
};> Detainee who refuses representation by Duty Counsel. 
8. Such a return must also be made available to Crime and Problems Analysis (CAP A) Branch . 
. . . . . .. ./3 



116/3 
9. A register shall be kept at each station or detention centre outlining: 
J- The name and age of the detainee; 
!.1,. The offence detained for; 
~ The Duty Counsel ass igned to the detainee; 
!.l- Whether detainee was charged or released. 
10. Entries are to be made accordingly in the said register capturing the data mentioned at paragraph 9 
above. 
11. Where a detainee refuses a representative provided by the Authority a call shall still be made to the said 
Authority and entries made in the relevant station diary and Telephone message book. 
Commissioner of Police 