Police Orders by 
Commissioner ofPolice 
Police Administration Building 
Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets 
Port of Spain 
Thursday 14th October 2010 
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian 
employees ofthe Police Service and is not for publication in the Press) 
No_ 195 Departmental Order PART I- NlL 
PART II 
Proper Use of Tactical/ Leg Holster 
INFORMATION : Recent observations resulted in bringing to the attention of the Executive of 
the Trinidad & Tobago Police Service that a dangerous practice has been 
adopted by uniform officers engaged in the performance of their general 
duties. Notwithstanding , advice that the Tactical/ Leg Holsters were not 
designed for use by police officers in uniform who in most cases have to 
interact directly with the general public, quite a large number of officers still 
choose to do so. 
INTENTIO N: This order seeks to promote a heightened awareness as to the various types 
of holsters to be used by members of the Trinidad and Tobago Police 
Service. Further, to enlighten Police Officers of the dangerous practices that 
have been adopted by uniformed officers in the performance of their general 
duties, by not securing the firearm in the specific holster which renders same 
dangerous and does not auger well for safety and retention of the said 
weapon . 
METHOD OF 
PROCEDURE : 
L 
2. 
3_ 
4_ 
5_ 
TYPE OF HOLSTER FOR USE BY 
Waist/ Hip Holsters- Inner Detectives (for concealed carry) 
Waist/ Hip Holsters- Outer Uniform officers 
Shoulder Holsters Special Units (Security Detail for use with 
Suit) 
Ankle Holsters Uniform & Plain Clothes Officers 
Tacticall Leg/ Low Ride Holsters Special/ Tactical Units/ Sections ONLY 
Members of the Trinidad & Tobago Police Service are to be guided in 
relation to the choice and use ofholsters as is hereunder stated . Holsters are 
generally designed to be used with one hand, allowing the object to be 
removed and or replaced with one hand. To be able to return an item to a 
holster one- handed, the holster shoulder be made of a fairly stiff substance 
that holds its shape, so that the holster would not collapse without the 
object inside to give it support. 



195/2 
Holsters can be divided into three (3) broad categories by use: 
I. Duty Holsters worn by uniformed police officers 
2. Concealment Holsters worn by plain clothes officers 
3. Sporting Holsters worm for shooting sports and hunting 
The Two applicable categories above shall be treated with hereunder : -
ADMlNISTRATION : 
1. Duty holsters are designed to be carried openly, so concealment is 
not an issue. However as they are visible to others, weapon 
retention is their critical consideration. Appearance is also 
important to duty holsters, as they are generally considered part of 
the wearer's uniform. 
2. Concealment Holsters are designed to be light weight and 
unobtrusive and are generally designed for compact and mid-size 
hand guns. Concealment Holsters are designed to be worn under 
clothing, such as on the belt under a coat, under pants and ankle 
holster, or in a trouser pocket. 
It is to be noted that a paramount consideration in the performance of 
the duties of a police officer issued with a firearm is the retention of the 
said firearm. A Holster designed with retention in mind will help 
prevent the firearm from being removed from the holster by anyone 
other than the person wearing it. A further equally important 
consideration relates to that which is commonly referred to as Holster 
Ease which mandates that a rigid walled holster will allow a gun to be 
returned to it with one hand; while a flexible one may collapse after the 
gun is drawn requiring the use ofboth hands to reholster. 
Heads of Divisions/ Branches/ Sections/ Units are to ensure that when 
officers are being detailed for the various types of duties which entails 
the use of firearms that the proper holster is worn by the officer for 
carrying around such firearm. 
P ARIID- NIL" 
(~ 
CommissiOner ofPolice 