—*
Ea Police Orders by

“Es Commissioner of Police

5 Wi Police Administration Building

ae, Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets

Perorecr an Port of Spain
Wednesday 9" December, 2020

(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian employees of
the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)

No. 172 Departmental Order PART I&III- NIL PART - I

Medical Board Policy and Procedure

1.0 Background

In accordance with Regulation 33 of the Police Service Regulations (2007):

(1) A Medical Board shall be appointed whenever it is necessary for an officer to
be examined with a view to ascertaining whether he should be retired on grounds
of ill health.

(2) An officer may be required by the Commissioner to undergo a medical
examination by a Medical Board at any time.

2.0 Implementation of the Policies and Procedures as outlined below is intended to provide
a greater level of health care and support to officers and generally improve efficiency in
treating with the health of officers, thereby enhancing performance and productivity.

The Medical Board Policy and Procedures will be introduced with effect from January 2021.

3.0 Roles & Responsibilities

3.1 The Commissioner of Police

The Commissioner of Police hereinafter referred to as (“the Commissioner”) decides on the matters

relating to the medical assessment of an officer based on the advice and recommendations of the

Medical Board.

The Commissioner shall be responsible for the appointment and removal of the members of the Board

and its administrative support staff.

The Commissioner of Police, shall, in writing, facilitate the convening of the Trinidad and Tobago

Police Service Medical Board which shall comprise of duly qualified medical professionals registered

with the Medical Board of Trinidad and Tobago.

3.2 _Branches /Divisions / Units /Sections

First Divisions Officers in charge of Branches, Divisions, Units and Sections must support Line

Managers in the day to day management of ill health issues, ensuring that a consistent approach is

taken. They should provide guidance to line managers on the officers’ cases ensuring policies and

procedures are applied consistently and fairly.
swt


--- page break ---

: 172/2
3.3 Line Managers/Supervisors
Line managers and Supervisors shall manage and support the officers through the relevant procedures
leading up to and including the process for Medical Board assessments.
3.4 Officers
Officer have primary responsibility for their own health and wellbeing. They also have
responsibilities towards the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service (hereinafter referred to as TTPS) and
must co-operate with TTPS procedures pursuant to Regulation 33(3) of the Police Service Act
Chapter 15:01, which states: “An officer who is required to undergo a medical examination shall
submit himself to be examined by a Medical Board at such time and place as the Commissioner may
direct”.
3.5 Head Human Resource or Director Human Resources
The Head Human Resources or in his/her absence the Director Human Resources shall be responsible
for the preparation and maintenance of a medical file of an officer to be assessed by a Medical Board
and shall ensure that all applications and Medicals received for all Police Officers are updated on
their files on a timely basis.
The Head Human Resources or in his/her absence the Director Human Resources shall provide advice
and guidance to both the Line Manager and the officer on the policy and procedures of the TTPS for
Medical Board assessments.
The Head Human Resources or in his/her absence the Director Human Resources shall ensure that
immediately on an Officer being on extended sick leave or injury leave continuously for a period of
ninety (90) days or more, a request is made to the Commissioner of Police for every such Officer to
be examined before a Medical Board.
The Head Human Resources or in his/her absence the Director Human Resources, upon receipt of the
Appointment notice-from the Medical Board shall notify the Police Officer of the date, time and place
of that appointment.
The Head Human Resources or in his/her absence the Director Human Resources in collaboration
with the Head Executive Management Services shall ensure that Police Medical Health Facility is
adequately staffed with competent persons. In addition, the Medical Board may require specialists
and medical experts to be hired on a short term contract basis at such time and for specified periods
as may be needed to conduct medical examinations.
3.6 Police Medical Health Facility :
The Police Medical Health Facility shall provide health advice, guidance and support to both Police
Officers and Line Managers. Additionally, cases which require immediate attention will be treated
with priority and expedited.

../3


--- page break ---

172/3
3.7 Medical Board Administrative Staff
Administrative Staff of the Medical Board shall be responsible for providing administrative support
to the Medical Board.
The Administrative staff of the Medical Board shall ensure that reasonable notice is given to the
officer of his scheduled appointment to appear before the Medical Board.
4.0 Composition and size of the Medical Board
The Medical Board shall consist of a minimum of two (2) medical practitioners where one must be a
specialist in the condition of the Officer being examined in order for the assessment to be done.
The composition of the Medical Board shall be as follows:
- A minimum of one (1) Specialist relevant to the particular medical ailment
- A minimum of one (1) and maximum of two (2) TTPS General Practitioners
- An optional Occupational Psychologist as necessary
5.0 Process for Medical Board Assessments
5.1 Request for a Medical Board Assessment
A request for a Medical Board assessment shall be made to the Head Human Resources or in his/her
absence the Director Human Resources by the Head/ Supervisor of any Division/Branch/
Section/Unit/Station if one or more of the following occurs:
1) An officer is on injury leave for a continuous period exceeding ninety (90) days;
2) An officer is on an extension of sick leave for a continuous period;
3) An officer is observed to be utilizing his sick leave entitlement in a manner where it can be
perceived that he is abusing such entitlement;
4) A request is received from the Police Medical Officer.
5.2 Direct Referral for a Medical Board Assessment
Notwithstanding the above, where an officer has been on extended sick/injury leave for a continuous
period of ninety (90) days or more, the Head Human Resources or in his/her absence the Director
Human Resources may make a direct referral for an assessment of such officer by the Medical Board.
When it is observed that an officer has utilized his entitlement in such a manner that it can be
perceived that he has abused his entitlement,.the Head Human Resources or in his/her absence the
Director Human Resources may also make a direct referral to the Medical Board for the officer to be
examined.
./4


--- page break ---

172/4
6.0 Recommendations of the Medical Board
6.1 Assessment Outcomes
Upon the assessment of the officer, the Medical Board may recommend that the officer is:

1) Fit to resume duties: where the officer is deemed medically fit to work after an illness or
injury and can perform his job or task under the regular working conditions;

2) Fit to resume duties with exemption: where the officer is deemed fit to work after an illness
or injury and can perform his job or task under regular working conditions with exemptions.

3) Unfit for duties on a temporary basis (to be reassessed in six (6) months or less): The
officer is deemed unable to work and cannot perform his job or task under the regular working
conditions. He must then be re-assessed within a six (6) month period. During this period, he
must account for his absence by tendering the necessary sick leave applications.

4) Unfit for duties on a permanent basis (with full or partial disabilities): the officer has a
mental or physical disability or illness which renders him incapable of performing his job or
task under the regular working condition and therefore, is unable to continue employment.

6.2 Process following the Medical Board’s Recommendation
Following the assessment of an Officer by the Medical Board, the recommendation of the Board shall
be communicated to the Commissioner.
Upon receipt of the recommendation from the Medical Board, the Commissioner shall facilitate such
recommendation. The Officer shall be informed in writing of the Board’s decision within twenty-
eight (28) working days and instructed to:

1) resume full duties or,

2) resume partial duties for a specific period of time, after which further request will be made to

the Medical Board for a reassessment or,
3) continue on sick/injury leave for a specific period of time, after which a further request will
be made to the Medical Board for a reassessment or,

4) retire from the TTPS on grounds of ill-health with such benefits.
Where a person is deemed to be fit for duty and has been notified of the Medical Board’s decision
and supplied a date to report for duty and he fails to do so, such absence and/or continued sick leave
would give rise to a determination by the Commissioner of Police on his continued employment with
the TTPS.
7.0 Policy Review/ Revision
It shall be mandatory for this policy to be reviewed every five years or on any earlier date as the
Commissioner of Police may find necessary giving due consideration to any changes.

Commissioner of Police
