Cs) Police Orders by Mr. Gary Griffith
CAS Commissioner of Police ~
vs Police Administration Building
Bs rots ce so Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
Propet amv se Port of Spain
Friday July 12, 2019
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian employees of the Police

Service and is not for publication in the Press or for distribution in the public domain)
vest iii
No. 125 Departmental Order PART I - Nil

PART II
Trinidad_and_ Tobago Police Service Use of Force Policy on Taser_and Pepper Spray-
(Intermediate Weapons)
Purpose
To establish and ensure strict adherence to the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service (TTPS)
approved training, deployment, reporting and follow-up of the use of the TASER Conducted
Electrical Weapon (CEW) and the Oleoresin Capsicum (O.C.) Pepper Spray.
Policy Statement:
It shall be the policy of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service to use only that level of force that
is reasonably necessary to control or otherwise subdue violent or potentially violent offenders. In
accordance with this policy and the TTPS Use of Force Policy, the TTPS shall provide officers
with the TASER CEW and the Oleoresin Capsicum (O.C.) Pepper Spray as means to achieve that
end. It shall also be the policy of the TTPS that indiscriminate use of the TASER and the Pepper
Spray will not be tolerated. Failure to comply with this policy may result in, but, is not limited to
disciplinary action.
Intermediate Weapons
The TTPS Use of Force Policy Force Option Model identifies that intermediate weapons such as
the TASER and the Pepper Spray are less-lethal force weapons permitted by the said policy for
use against a subject who is actively resisting the officer or is assaultive towards the officer or
other persons.
125/1


--- page break ---

TTPS Use of Force Policy Option Model
COOPERATIVE
“S.3SESe’
<osstss |
\
im
Intermediate Weapons
Definitions
In this policy
“Active Resistance” means resistance exhibited by a suspect that is between Passive Resistance
and Assaultive and includes physically evasive movements to defeat a police officer’s attempt at
control (e.g., attempts to leave the scene, flee, hide from detection, or pull away from the officer’s
grasp).
“Assaultive” means when a subject attempts to attack or actually attacks an officer or another
person. Exhibiting aggressive behavior (e.g., lunging toward the officer, taking a fighting stance,
striking the officer with hands, fists, kicks) are examples of being Assaultive.
“Cartridge” means a Taser cartridge, which contains metal probes connected by insulated wires
which delivers Neuro Muscular Incapacitation (NMI).
“Commissioner” means the Commissioner of Police.
“Conducted Electrical Weapon” means - a less-lethal force weapon utilized by trained personnel
that causes Neuro Muscular Incapacitation (NMI) to a combative subject.
125/2


--- page break ---

“Drive Stun” or “Touch Stun” means — A secondary function of the TASER is to stun a subject
by making direct contact with the arc bays of the TASER to the body, preferably targeting the
pressure point areas of the legs and arms.
“Emergency Medical Technicians” means a person who is registered with Part VI of the
Emergency Ambulance Services and Emergency Medical Personnel Act Chapter 29:02
“Oleoresin Capsicum (OC)” means a natural inflammatory agent which is derived from the
pepper plant.
“OC Pepper Spray” means a less-lethal weapon deployed from an aerosol canister containing
Oleoresin Capsicum which acts as an inflammatory agent that when utilized on a subject usually
causes a near immediate inflammation of the eyes and breathing passages. The use of this device
is intended to incapacitate the subject with a minimal potential for causing death or great bodily
harm.
“Smart Cartridge” means — A replacement cartridge for the TASER, which uses compressed
nitrogen to fire two barbed probes on thin connecting wires sending a high voltage/low current
signal into a subject.
“Sensitive Tissue Area” means — Areas of the body, which are especially sensitive to injury. These
areas include the head, face, neck, genitals, male nipple and female breast.
“Spark Display” means — A non-contact demonstration of the TASER’s ability to discharge
electricity. The purpose of this display is to convince the subject to comply with a lawful order
and avoid the TASER being deployed in the drive stun or probe
“TASER” means — For the purpose of this policy, a less-lethal force Conducted Electrical Weapon
(CEW), owned by the government of Trinidad and Tobago which are assigned to the Trinidad and
Tobago Police Service that has the capability of disrupting the body’s ability to communicate
messages from the brain to the muscles causing Neuro Muscular Incapacitation (NMI) to the body.
A. Procedures
a) Both the Taser and the Pepper Spray are “prohibited weapons” under the Firearms Act
Chapter 16:01 Section 2(1). Police Officers by virtue of Section 7(1) are exempted from
the provisions of Section 6(1) of the Act and are authorized to use both Tasers and Pepper
Sprays in their capacity as such.
b) TTPS Standing Orders No. 41 Police Firearms and Ammunition shall apply mutatis
mutandis(the necessary changes being made) to TTPS TASERS and Cartridges
c) Only sworn officers who have satisfactorily completed TTPS approved training courses
shall be authorized to carry and utilize the TASER and/or Pepper Spray.
125/3


--- page break ---

B. Taser and Pepper Spray Readiness

1. Both devices must be carried on the officer’s utility belt in the approved Taser and Pepper
Spray holsters on the officers support side, the side opposite to the officer’s firearm.
Officers who are assigned plainclothes duties may utilize other TTPS approved holsters
and carry the devices consistent with departmental training.

2. The Taser shall be carried fully armed with the safety on (or applied). Officers authorized
to use the device shall be issued a minimum of two (2) cartridges, which shall be loaded
into the cartridge bays of the TASER at all times. The cartridges shall be replaced after
deployment, damaged or consistent with the manufacturer’s expiration requirements.

3. Only TASER and TTPS approved battery power sources shall be used in TTPS TASERS.

C. Use of the Taser CEW or the O.C. Pepper Spray

Either the Taser CEW or the O.C. Pepper Spray may be used by trained police officers when a
subject is actively resisting an officer and the subject poses an articulated threat of harm to an
officer or another person. Both devices shall not, in any circumstances, be deployed
simultaneously on the same subject.

1. An officer is not permitted to use the Taser or the Pepper Spray on compliant and passive
resistant subjects who do not pose an articulated threat of harm to the officer or others.

D. General Prohibition

The Taser and the Pepper Spray are discretionary compliance technique tools that shall only be
used to gain compliance against actively resisting suspects. As such, it is prohibited to use either
device in the following circumstances:

1. Ina punitive or coercive manner;

2. On a handcuffed/secured prisoner, in the absence of an overtly assaultive behavior that
cannot be reasonably dealt with in any other less intrusive fashion;

3. Onany suspect who does not demonstrate their overt intention to; (1) use violence or force
against the officer or another person, or (2) flee in order to resist/avoid detention or arrest.

4. On children appearing to weigh less than 100 pounds, unless the subject is attacking the
officer or when deadly force is justified;

5. On women known or reasonably suspected to be pregnant unless in situations where deadly
force is warranted and justified;

125/4


--- page break ---

The Use of the Taser is prohibited

6. In any environment where an officer knows that a potentially flammable, volatile, or
explosive material is present (including, but not limited to Oleoresin Capsaicin (OC) spray
with volatile propellant, gasoline, natural gas, or propane);

7. In an environment where the subject’s fall could reasonably result in death (such as a
swimming pool or on an elevated structure);

8. In any situation where the subject or their clothing may be knowingly contaminated with a
combustible liquid, gas, or highly combustible material;

9. In drive stun or probe mode for pain compliance or NMI for no more than Fifteen (15)
seconds collectively while attempting to take someone into custody. However, drive stun
or probe mode may be used in a defensive manner for more than fifteen (15) seconds
collectively if an officer is being attacked and the suspect is actively assaulting the officer
or a third party. Any subsequent CEW applications beyond fifteen (15) seconds should be
independently justifiable, and the risks should be weighed against other force options

10. The use of the TASER should be avoided, if possible, in the following situations:

a) Subjects in control of a motor vehicle;

b) Subjects with known heart problems;

d) Subjects with an obvious debilitating illness;

e) The elderly;

f) Subjects with known neuromuscular disorders such as muscular sclerosis, muscular
dystrophy or epilepsy.

The Use of Pepper Spray is prohibited
11. As a measure to disperse crowds or others unless those crowds or others are committing acts
that endanger an officer or to public safety where participants refuse to obey lawful orders
to disperse, only then will use of Pepper Spray be deemed objectively reasonable, necessary,
and proportional to prevent the offence being committed in these situations.
12. In areas where the use of Pepper Spray could reasonably be foreseen to cause panic, e.g.
spraying in a darkened movie theatre.
E. Deployment of the Taser
In preparation for deployment, the TASER shall be pointed in a safe direction, taken off ‘safe’
mode and the following procedure followed:
1. Laser sights should be used as the primary aiming device and the fixed sights as the secondary
aiming device.
125/5


--- page break ---

2. Before being deployed, the word “TASER” will be used by the deploying officer to announce
the TASER’s impending use.

3. Upon firing the device, the officer shall “tase” the subject the least number of times and no
longer than necessary to accomplish the legitimate operational objective. The subject is to be
secured as soon as practical while disabled by TASER power to minimize the number of
deployment cycles.

4. The subject should be handcuffed and restrained as soon as the officer deems the situation safe
for handcuffing. If another officer is present, the other officer should handcuff the subject
immediately after the first application of the TASER while the subject is recovering from the
initial incapacitation.

5. The officer should continue talking to the subject and give verbal commands throughout
this process.

6. The subject must be continually monitored by the officer for any signs of medical distress
related to the use of the TASER and shall not be left alone while in custody. If medical distress
is detected, or made known to the officer, the subject shall be taken to a Government Medical
Institution immediately.

7. The device may be used in certain circumstances in a “touch stun” or otherwise called “drive
stun” mode. This involves pressing the ARC bay against an appropriate area of the body,
(pressure points) based on training. When the Taser is used in this manner it is important to
note the following:

a. That it is primarily a pain compliance tool due to a lack of probe spread;

b. It has minimal effectiveness when compared to conventional cartridge type
deployments;

c. It is more likely to leave marks on the subject’s skin.

8. When applying the drive stun mode, contact with the offender should be to the trunk, back
arms and legs, but not to the face and head.

9. The TASER should be pointed in a safe direction with the safety on (applied) during loading,
unloading, or when handled in other than an operational deployment. Do not hold a cartridge
within three (3) inches of the TASER

125/6


--- page break ---

F. Aftercare:
Following the use of the TASER, the following procedures will be adhered to:

1. The TASER probes shall be removed from the subject after being restrained following the
procedures outlined in training. Officers shall use rubber gloves and treat cartridges as a
biohazard. The following areas of the body are considered sensitive: the groin, the face
(especially the eyes), the neck, the female breast, or the male nipple. Any darts imbedded in
these areas must be removed by trained medical professionals.

2. The Second Division Officer in charge of the Station/Section/Unit concerned shall make
written records of the affected area of the suspects body, (probe and drive stun sites) and of
any secondary injuries the suspect receives.

3. Photographs of the affected area, (probe and drive stun sites) and of any secondary injuries
the suspect sustained, should be taken if the officer or the Second Division Officer in charge
of the Station/Section/Unit concerned feels such injuries are serious enough to be
documented.

4. Medical evaluations and clearance shall adhere to the following procedures:

a) All suspects where the TASER was used for more than fifteen (15) seconds
collectively shall have their vital signs evaluated by a Government Medical Officer or
at a Government Medical Institution.

b) Any suspect where the TASER was used less than fifteen (15) seconds may have their
vital signs evaluated by an Emergency Medical Technician, upon request from the
officer, the Second Division Officer in charge of his Station/Section/Unit or the
suspect.

c) Any suspect that exhibits signs of delirium or shortness of breath or other unusual
symptoms shall be immediately evaluated by a Government Medical Officer or at a
Government Medical Institution.

G. Deployment of the Pepper Spray

1. When employing Pepper Spray outdoors, the officers should position themselves upwind
from the subject before spraying.

2. Officers must also be aware that deploying Pepper Spray indoors, especially in confined
areas, increases the risk of contaminating the deploying officer, other officers and
bystanders.

3. Except under extreme conditions Pepper Spray should not be employed when other officers
are within the spray area. Where possible, the spraying officer shall clearly verbalize a
warning to other officers that the use of Pepper Spray is imminent and the other officers
should immediately vacate the spray area.

125/7


--- page break ---

4. Aim for the eyebrows/eyes of the individual.

5. Do not deploy Pepper Spray from a distance that is less than 3 feet from the subject, unless
absolutely necessary.

6. The recommended dosage is two (2) one-second bursts.

7. Use extreme caution when handling a subject who is not affected by the use of Pepper

Spray.

H. Procedures following the deployment of Pepper Spray
1. Subjects who have been exposed to Pepper Spray should be provided the opportunity to
wash the affected areas as soon as practical. In most cases this should occur within 20
minutes.
2. Officers shall provide verbal instructions on how to wash affected areas and reassurance
that the symptoms will subside over time.
3. Officers shall not provide any creams, ointments, or bandages to be used on affected areas.
4. Officers may not keep a Pepper Sprayed subject in a face-down position any longer than
reasonably necessary to take the subject into custody, in order to avoid positional asphyxia.
5. While subjects are on their stomach they should be monitored for breathing difficulties.
I. Duty to Provide Medical Assistance
Officers shall immediately render aid consistent with his/her training and experience. The Officer
shall arrange immediate transport to a hospital for medical treatment for subjects on whom Pepper
Spray has been used, under the following circumstances:

1. Subjects who complain of or exhibit continued effects after having flushed the affected
areas;

2. Subjects who indicate they have a pre-existing medical condition, for example, asthma,
emphysema, bronchitis, heart ailment, or other medical condition that may be
aggravated by Pepper Spray; or

3. At any point after exposure the subject displays a reaction not consistent with the
expected reaction to aerosol Pepper Spray.

125/8


--- page break ---

J. Reporting:
It shall be the duty of a Police Officer who has deployed a TASER (drive stun/probe) or the Pepper
Spray to immediately notify his or her immediate senior. The deploying officer is required to
submit a report of the facts of the deployment in writing through his immediate senior to the First
Division Officer in charge of the Division/Branch/Section to which he is attached no later than
forty-eight hours after the deployment who in turn is required to forward such report within seven
(7) days to the Commissioner of Police through the Assistant Commissioner responsible for that
area. In addition to this requirement, whenever any officer points the TASER at a person, but does
not deploy it, the involved officer will so note this fact in his or her Pocket Diary and Station Diary.
A weekly return of all reports involving the use of TASER and Pepper Sprays must be submitted
to CAPA through the Divisional Heads in a format to be determined by that Branch.
K. Data Collection:
TASER data downloading will be conducted by personnel of the Crime and Problem Analyst
Branch (CAPA) or any other section approved by the Commissioner or his designate.
H. Approval and Review
It shall be mandatory for this policy to be reviewed three (3) years after the date of implementation,
and or on such time and date as the Commissioner may find necessary, also giving due
consideration to any legislative changes.
PART III - Nil
=
ZL
Commissioner of Police
125/9
