No. 150 
Police Orders by 
Commissioner of Police 
Police Administration Building 
Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets 
Port of Spain 
Thursday 23rd August 2007 
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian 
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press) 
Departmental Order PART I 
PART IT 
CEREMONIAL OPENING OF THE 2007/2008 LAW TERM OF THE SUPREME COURT OF 
JUDICATURE OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO 
1. INFORMATION 
1:1 The Ceremonial Opening of the 2007/2008 Law Term of the Supreme Court of 
Judicature ofTrinidad and Tobago will take place on Monday 1711t September 2007. 
1:2 The Programme will commence at 10.00 am with an Ecumenical Service at the Cathedral 
ofthe Holy Trinity, Abercromby Street, Port of Spain. 
1 :3 Following the Service, there will be a procession from the Cathedral of the Holy Trinity 
to the Hall of Justice, led by The Honourable , The Acting Chief Justice, Mr. Justice 
Roger Hamel-Smith and Mrs. Hamel-Smith along with other members of the Legal 
Profession. 
1:4 The route for the procession is as follows: -'Assembly'- at the entrance of the Cathedral 
on Abercromby Street, North along Abercromby Street and east into Knox Street to end 
in front of the Hall of Justice. 
1:5 A Guard of Honour formed by members of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service will 
be required to assemble on Knox Street in front of the Hall of Justice and will be 
inspected by The Honourable, The Acting Chief Justice. 
1 :6 The Commissioner of Police will accompany the Chief Justice and the Commander of the 
Guard of Honour during the Inspection. 
1:7 The Guard of Honour would be supervised by the following officers:-
1:8 
1:9 
Parade Commander 
Second in Command 
Reserve (Alternate) 
Flag Party 
Female Police Detachment 
Supt. H. Cumberbatch 
Asst. Supt. H Lovell 
Insp. Clarke 
Asst. Supt. J. Nedd 
Woman Asst. Supt. M. Sampson-Browne 
1: 10 The Guard of Honour will then march past The Honourable, The Acting Chief Justice 
and other members of the Legal Profession along Abercromby Street . 
.. ./2 



2/150 
2. INTENTION 
2:1 The intention of this Order is to ensure all members of the Police Service are properly 
briefed and aware of their roles and functions as they relate to providing adequate 
protection and security for all persons involved in this ceremony and to minimize any 
public inconvenience. 
3. METHOD 
3:1 OPERATI ON GUARD - FORMATI ON 
3: 1: 1 The Guard of Honour shall fall in on Sackville Street between Edward and St Vincent 
Streets, at 10.45 am on Monday 17th September, 2007 and will march off east along 
Sackville Street, south along St. Vincent Street, east along Hart Street, north along 
Abercromby Street, east into Knox Street, and called to order in front of the Hall of 
Justice for inspection by The Honourable, The Acting Chief Justice. 
3:1:2 Following the inspection, the Guard of Honour will march off east along Knox Street, 
north along Pembroke Street, west along Duke Street, south along Abercromby Street 
where the Chief Justice will take the Salute (at the Abercromby Street entrance to the 
Hall of Justice). From the saluting base west into Knox Street, South along St. Vincent 
Street, west into Sackville Street to Police Headquarters where the parade will be 
dismissed. 
3:2 .PRESERVING ORDER DUTIES 
3:2:1 Members of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service shall: 
3:2:1: (a) 
3:2:1: (b) 
3:2:1: (c) 
3:2:1: (d) 
Mount a Guard ofHonour 
Preserve order outside the Cathedral of the Holy Trinity on Hart and Abercromby 
Streets Port of Spain, along the route of the Procession, outside of and inside the 
precincts of the Hall of Justice . 
Manage all traffic arrangements for this occasion outside the Cathedral of the 
Holy Trinity, along the route of the Procession, outside the Hall of Justice and 
provide reserve parking on Hart Street between Frederick and Abercromby Streets 
for members of the Legal Profession and other specially invited guests 
Provide an armed escort for the Guard of Honour . 
3:3 GUARD OF HONOUR 
3:3: 1 Senior Superintendent , Police Academy shall be responsible for the selection of 
personnel to form the Guard of Honour. 
3:3:2 He shall detail a Superintendent to be in charge of the detachment, who shall be assisted 
by one Assistant Superintendent and one Inspector. 
3:3:3 The Police Band under the command ofthe Director, shall be in attendance . 
. . ./3 



3/150 
3:4 REHEARSALS 
3:4;1 There will be two (2) sessions of rehearsals for offieers forming the Guard for Honour, 
which will be conducted as follows:-
On Wednesday 121h September 2007 at 8.30 a.m. at the Police Academy . 
On Friday 14th September, 2007 at 6.00 a.m.on Sackville Street between Edward and 
St. Vincent Streets, Port-of-Spain. 
3:5 DUTIES/RESPONSffiiLITIES 
3:5:1 Senior Superintendent, Port of Spain Division shall be responsible for the supervision of 
all personnel preserving order, except inside the Hall of Justice. 
3:5:2 Senior Superintendent, Port of Spain Division shall be responsible for all details of 
preserving order duties to be performed outside and in the environs of the Cathedral of 
the Holy Trinity , along the route to be taken by the procession, the Guard of Honour and 
immediate environs of the Hall of Justice. 
3:5:3 Senior Superintendent, Court and Process Branch shall personally supervise all duties 
inside the Hall of Justice. He shall also arrange for an adequate strength of personnel 
under his command to preserve order inside the Hall of Justice and its immediate 
environs for this occasion. 
3:5:4 Senior Superintendent 'Traffic/Highway Patrol Branch' shalJ ensure "NO PARKING" 
is permitted on Knox Street, between 5.00 a.m. and 7.30 a.m. on Friday 14th September, 
2007 to facilitate the final rehearsal of The Guard of Honour. 
3:5:5 Senior Superintendent 'Traffic/Highway Patrol Branch' shall supervise all traffic 
arrangements. 
3:5:6 Senior Superintendent 'Traffic/Highway Patrol Branch' shall detail an adequate strength 
of personnel to be used for the rehearsal as well as the parade. 
3:5:7 Women Police Officers must be included in all preserving order duties. 
3:6 PARKING SACKVJLLE STREET/RESERVED PARKING 
3:6: 1 No parking will be permitted on Sackv111e Street between Edward and St Vincent Streets, 
between and 6.00 am and 12.00 midday on Monday 17th September, 2007. 
3:6:2 Alternative parking arrangements shall be provided by the Assistant Commissioner 
'Mobile', in conjunction with Senior Superintendent 'Traffic/Highway Patrol Branch'. 
3:6:3 Reserved parking shall be provided on Hart Street between Frederick Street and 
Abercromby Street, for members of the Legal Profession and other specially invited 
guests. Persons using the reserve parking area shall be provided with Special Sticke rs, 
authorizing them to park thereat. An advance party must be detailed to secure the 
parking area. 
. . ./4 



4/150 
3:6:4 Parking is reserved on the eastern side of Edward Street between Queen and Sackville 
Streets for vehicles of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service conveying members of the 
Guard of Honour, and the Police Officers detailed for preserving order and traffic duties. 
3:6:5 No vehicles are to be parked along the route to be used by the procession and the Guard 
of Honour. 
3:6:6 All vehicular traffic must be prevented from entering all routes to be used by the 
procession and Guard of Honour , during the time of the parade. Alternative diversion 
must be made to minimize inconvenience to the travelling public. 
3:6:7 Police Wreckers would be deployed to ensure strict enforcement of the Traffic 
Regulations made for this occasion. Motor Cyclists are to be detailed to patrol the outer 
area, to deal with any contravention of these Regulations. Also, to assist with any unusual 
congestion which might occur due to diversions. 
3:6:8 The widest possible publicity is to be given to these Regulations, including the alternative 
routes and diversions, to minimize the inconvenience that is likely to occur to the public. 
4. ADMINISTRATION 
4:1 GENERAL SUPERVlSION 
4:1:1 Assistant Commissioner 'North/West' shall be responsible for overall supervision of all 
preserving order duties for this event and shall be assisted by the Senior Superintendent , 
Port of Spain Division . 
4:1:2 Assistant Commissioner 'North/West' in conjunction with Senior Superintendent , Port of 
Spain Division, shall decide on an adequate strength to be used for this occasion. The 
strength shall be provided from all Divisions under his supervision . 
4:1:3 Assistant Commissioner 'Mobile' shall arrange for personnel from the Mounted Branch 
to form part of the preserving order party and to escort the procession from the Cathedral 
to the Hall of Justice. 
4:2 ESCORT FOR HONOURABLE CHIEF JUSTICE 
4:2:1 Assistant Commissioner 'Mobile ' is required to arrange a Motor Cycle escort for The 
Honourable, The Acting Chief Justice from his residence to the formal Opening 
Ceremony. 
4:3 TRAFFIC CONTROL DUTIES 
4:3: 1 Assistant Commissioner 'Mobile' shall in conjunction with Senior Superintendent ' 
Traffic/Highway Patrol Branch ', make appropriate arrangements for all parking and 
traffic control duties outside the Cathedral of the Holy Trinity, along the route of the 
procession of the Guard of Honour , and outside the Hall of Justice on the day of the 
Parade. 
4:3:2 It shall be the responsibility of the Assistant Commissioner 'Mobile' to prepare and 
submit to the appropriate authority on behalf of the Commissioner of Police, the 
necessary Temporary Traffic Regulations which are to be enforced for this occasion. 
4:4 TRANSPORT 
4:4:1 Assistant Commissioner 'Mobile ' shall make arrangements with Superintendent 
Transport and Telecommunication Branches , to provide suitable transport for all 
members of the Police Service engaged in this exercise. 



5/150 
4:5 DRESS 
4:5:1 Dress for this occasion shall be as follows:-
(i) 
(ii) 
4:6 ITINERARY 
First Division Officers 
and Inspectors 
Other Ranks 
Service Dress, 
Canes to be carried 
Patrol Order No. I 
with Rain Cloaks 
4:6:1 The full itinerary of the proceedings is attached as Appendix ' A'. 
4:6:2 A list of Judges of the Supreme Court of Judicature is attached as Appendix 'B'. 
4:6:3 Temporary Traffic Regulations are attached as Appendix 'C'. 
5. COMMUNICATION 
5: I All First Division Officers and Inspectors engaged in this exercise shall carry Walbe 
Talkie Sets for communication. These sets shall be operated on Channel 7 A 
5:2 All Heads ofDivisions I Branches in charge ofUnits performing duty for this Ceremonial 
Opening must publish an Operational Order outlining their details of duties and ensure 
that all personnel under their command are properly briefed on their responsibilities for 
this event. 
GENERAL 
The Ceremonial Opening of the Law Term of the Supreme Court of Judicature of Trinidad and 
Tobago, is a very special occasion and every effort must be made by all members of the Police 
Service engaged in this exercise to ensure the safety of all rugnitaries attending the Ceremony. 
Additionally, because the function is taking place on a working day, every effort must be made 
to ensure that there is minimum disruption in the normal activities of the general public. 
Wherever possible, discretion should be exercised in a professional manner to preserve the 
efficient execution of police arrangements for this occasion. 
As a consequence, Police personnel are implored to be alert and vigilant while exercising tact, 
tolerance, dignity and courtesy in the performance of their duties, whilst providing services to 
our citizenry. 
A display of efficiency and effectiveness can win the highest praise of all and enhance the good 
image of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service, in keeping with our "Mission Statement" 
and "Code of Conduct " 
PART III- NlL 
)~ ~~ 
Commissioner of Police ~~. 



9:30 a.m. 
9:40 a.m. 
9:45 a.m. 
9:45 a.m. 
9:50 a.m. 
9:55 a.m. 
10:00 a.m. 
11:00 a.m. 
APPEND IX 'A' 
Magistrates , Members of the Industria l Court , Members of the Tax Appea l Board 
and Attorneys -at-law assemble in the compound of the Cathedral Church of the 
Hol y Trini ty, Abercromby Street , Port-of-Spain . 
The Honourable Judges of the Supreme Court and the Masters of the High Court 
join the assembly . 
The Honourable , The Acting Chief Justice and Mrs. Hamel-Smith arrive and are 
met by the Very Reverend Fr. Colin Sampson, Dean . 
Attorne ys-at-law (in reverse order of seniority , the most junior first), followed by 
the Magi strates (in reverse order of seniority), masters of the High Court and the 
Honourable Judges of the Supreme Court (in reverse order of seniority) , enter the 
Cathedral and take their seats . 
The Honourable Prime Minister and Senator Hazel Mannin g arrive and are 
accompanied to their seats by the Honourable Chief Justice and Mrs. Hamel­
Smith and by the Very Reverend Fr. Colin Sampson, Dean .. 
Their Excellencies , The President and Dr. Jean Ramjohn Richards arrive and are 
accompanied to their seats by the Honourable Chief Justice and Mrs. Hamel­
Smith and by the Very Reverend Fr. Collin Sampson . 
The congregation stands until they are seated . 
The Service ofDe vine Worship begins , conducted by the Inter -Religious 
Organization ofTrinidad and Tobago . 
Note: A coUection will be taken during the service. 
The service ends. The procession leaves the CathedraJ in the following sequence: 
Their Excellencies , The President and Dr. Jean Ram john Richards~ 
The Honourable Prime Minister and Senator Hazel Manning~ 
The Honourable Acting Chief Justice and Mrs . Hamel-Smith ; 
The Honourable Justices of the Appeal; 
The Honourable Judges of the High Court; 
The Masters of the High Court ; 
Magistrates ; 
Attorneys-at -law. 
Their Excellenc ies depart . The Judges , Masters and Magistrates then proceed 
north along Abercromby Street and east into Knox Street , ending in front of the 
Hall of Justice. 



1 t :10 a.m. 
1 t :20 a.m. 
11:30 a.m. 
II :50 a.m. 
12:00 noon 
The Honourable Judges of the Supreme Court and the Masters of the High Court 
proceed to their Chambers . Members of the legal profession and guests take up 
positions or seats on the steps of the Hall of Justice facing Knox Street and await 
the inspection of the Guard of Honour. 
The Honourable Judges of the Supreme Court and the Masters of the High Court, 
led by The Honourable The Acting Chief Justice, assemble on the steps of the 
Hall of Justice facing Knox Street; The Honourable The Acting Chief Justice 
inspects the Guard of Honour. 
The Honourable The Acting Chief Justice, the Honourable Judges of the Supreme 
Court and the Masters of the High Court assemble on the steps of the Hall of 
Justice facing Abercromby Street, where the Honourable Chief Justice takes the 
salute by the Guard of Honour. 
Members of the legal profession and guests take their seats in the Convocation 
Hall of the Hall of Justice. 
The Honourable The Acting Chief Justice and the Honourable Judges of the 
Supreme Court take their seats on the dais in the Convocation Hall. The 
Honourable The Acting Chief Justice addresses the gathering, opens the 2007-
2008 Law Term and adjourns Court. The Honourable The Acting Chief Justice 
and the Honourable Judges of the Supreme Court rise. 
End of proceedings 



APPENDIX 'B' 
JUDGES OF THE SUPREMEMCOURT OF JUDICATURE 
Honourable Mr. Justice Roger Hamel-Smith 
Acting Chief Justice and President of the Court of Appeal 
JUSTICES OF APPEAL 
Honourable Mme Justice Warner 
Honourable Mr. Justice Mr. Kangaloo 
Honourable Mr. Justice John 
Honourable Mr. Justice Archie 
Honourable Mr. Justice Medonca 
Honourable Mme Justice Weekes 
JUDGES OF THE HIGH COURT 
Honourable Mr. Justice Best 
Honourable Mr. Justice Volney 
Honourable Mr. Justice Stollmeyer 
Honourable Mr. Justice Narine 
Honourable Mr. Justice Smith 
Honourable Mr. Justice Jamadar 
Honourable Mr. Justice Bereaux 
Honourable Mr. Justice Moosai 
Honourable Mr. Justice Ventour 
Honourable Mme Justice Y orke-Soo Hon 
Honourable Mr. Justice Tam 
Honourable Mme Justice Tiwary-Reddy 
Honourable Mr. Justice Myers 
Honourable Mme Justice Rajnauth-Lee 
Honourable Mr. Justice Holdip 
Honourable Mr. Justice Mohammed 
Honourable Mr. Justice Dean-Armorer 
Honourable Mr. Justice Carmona 
Honourable Mme Justice Gobin 
Honourable Mme Justice Jones 
Honourable Mme Justice Charles 
Honourable Mr. Justice Pemberton 
Honourable Mr. Justice Rampersad 
Honourable Mr. Justice Brook 
Honourable Mr. Justice Ibrahim 
Honourable Mr. Justice Deyalsingh 
Honourable Mr. Justice Aboud 
Honourable Mr. Justice Hosein 
Honourable Mr. Justice Shah 
Honourable Mme Justice Ramkerrysingh 
MASTERS OF THE IDGH COURT 
Master Ralph Doyle 
Master Brenda Paray-Durity 
Master Patricia Sob ion 



APPENDIX "C' 
Legal Notice No. 
REPUBLIC OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO 
THE MOTOR VEIDCLES AND ROAD TRAFFIC ACT, CHAP. 48:50 
ORDER 
Made by the Commissioner of Police under section 68(1) of the Motor Vehicles 
and Road Traffic Act 
THE TRAFF IC RESTRICTION (TEMPORARY PROVISIONS) (FORMAL OPENING 
OF THE 2007-2008 LAW TERM OF THE SUPREME COURT OF JUDICATURE OF 
THE REPUBLIC OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO) ORDER , 2007 
Citation 
Duration 
Parking 
prohibited 
1. This Order may be cited as the Traffic Restriction (Temporary Provisions) 
(Formal Opening of the 2007-2008 Law Term of the Supreme Court of the 
Republic ofTrinidad and Tobago) Order, 2007. 
2. This Order has effect from 6:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. on Monday 171h 
September, 2007. 
3. (1) Parking is prohibited on the following: 
(a) St. Vincent Street, between Duke Street and Independence 
Square North; 
(b) Sackville Street, between Richmond Street and St. Vincent 
Street; 
(c) Abercromby Street, between Independence Square North and 
Park Street; 
(d) Knox Street, between St. Vincent Street and Frederick 
Street; 
(e) Edward Street, between Independence Square North and 
Park Street; 
(f) Hart Street; 
(g) Duke Street, between Frederick Street and St. Vincent Street; 
(h) Pembroke Street, between Knox Street and Park Street; 
(i) Henry Street, between Independence Square North and Park 
Street; and 
(j) Queen Street, between Frederick Street and Edward Street. 



Roads closed 
to vehicular 
traffic 
Vehicular 
traffic 
Taxi routes 
2 
(2) Notwithstanding subclause (1), motorist may park vehicles belonging 
to the Police Service and the Defence Force on the eastern side of Edward 
Street, between Queen Street and Sackville Street. 
(3) Parking is prohibited on the grounds of the Red House. 
4. (1) Vehicular traffic is prohibited from 9:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. on the 
following: 
(a) St. Vincent Street, between Duke Street and Queen Street; 
(b) Hart Street; 
(c) Abercromby Street, between Independence Square North and 
Park Street; 
(d) Knox Street; 
(e) Queen Street, between Frederick Street and Edward Street; 
and 
(f) Edward Street, between Independence Square North and 
Sackville Street. 
(2) Notwithstanding subclause (1), taxis drivers plying the St. Ann's 
route may park and access Queen Street from Frederick Street. 
5. From 9:00a .m. to 1:00 p.m. motorists proceeding-
(a) east along Sackville Street, shall tum north onto Edward 
Street; 
(b) west along Duke Street, shall tum north onto Pembroke 
Street; and 
(c) south on St. Vincent Street, shall tum west onto Duke Street. 
6. Taxi drivers that ply-
(a) the St. Ann's route from Hart Street, shall operate from the 
southern side of Queen Street, between Frederick Street and 
Abercromby Street; and 
(b) the St. James route from Hart Street, shall operate from the 
western side of Henry Street, between Prince Street and 
Duke Street. 



Removal and 
impounding of 
vehicles 
unlawfully 
parked 
3 
7. Without prejudice to any liability incurred by the Conunission of a 
sununary offence, vehicles found parked in contravention of this Order may be 
removed by the Police and impounded and dealt with in accordance with section 
l08(1)(b) of the Motor Vehicles and Road Traffic Act. 
Dated this dayof ~p~P.>~ ,2007 . 
Commi 