r¢ BS) Police Orders by
p< 4 Commissioner of Police
i 37-9 Police Administration Building
¢ Ten > Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
ae Port of Spain
PRorecr SA Thursday 19" February 2015
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
el
No. 15 Departmental Order PART I—NIL
PART I
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE CHILD PROTECTION UNIT
1. ESTABLISHMENT
The Child Protection Unit (CPU) of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service shall be
established within the service with effect from March 27", 2015. The main
office/Secretariat will be located at the Belmont Police Station. However, for operational
purposes the Child Protection Unit (CPU) will be decentralized in all nine (9) divisions.
2. CLASSIFICATION
The Child Protection Unit (CPU) is classified as a Class 2 Specialist Unit. Personnel
attached to this unit by its very nature will carry our investigative/operational functions in
relation to crimes against children and will receive internal and external specialized
training in all matters that will impact the lives of children criminally and otherwise.
3. INTENTION
The Child Protection Unit(CPU) is established to fulfill the requirements of the
Children’s Act 2012, the Children’s Authority (Amendment) Act 2008 and the Children’s
Community Residences, Foster Homes and Nurseries (Amendment) Act 2008, so that
focus can be paid to illegal and criminal matters affecting children.
4. ADMINISTRATIVE STRUCTURE
The Deputy Commissioner Crime and Support shall have overall responsibility for the
operations of the Child Protection Unit (CPU), however the Head of the Child Protection
Unit shall fall under the administrative directive of the assistant Commissioner of Police
“Anti-Crime Operation”.


--- page break ---

2/15
The Sanctioned strength of the Child Protection Unit (CPU) is as follows:-
[Inspectors PC CS
a Ce
| BOA (Business Operators) | CU
| TOTAL SANCTIONED STRENGTH [si
STRENGTH DISTRIBUTION

[Secretariat S| ot | 2 | a | - [i [| 2 | 7
| Port of Spain Division | - | - | 1 [| 2 [| 3 [ 12 | 18 |
|Western Division | - | - | 1 | 2 | 3 [| 122 | 18 |
Eastem Division | - | - | 1 [ 2 | 3 | 12 | 1 |
| Northern Division [| - [| - [| 1 | 2 | 3 [| 2 [| 18 |
|North Eastern Division | - | = [| 1 [| 2 | 3 [| 12 | 18 |
|Central Division | = | - [| 1 [| 2 [| 3 | 12 | 18 |
| South Westen Division | - | - | 1 | 2 | 3 | 12 | 18 |
Southem Division | = | = | 1 | 2 | 3 | 12 | 1
|TobagoDivision | - | - [| 1 [| 2 [| 3 | 12 | 18 |
‘Total | | 2 | ct | 8s | 28 | 10 | 169 |

5. TRAINING

1. The Vienna Convention on the Rights of the Child.

2. The Children’s Act

3. The Children’s Authority Act

4. The Children’s Community Residences, Fosters Homes and Nurseries (amendment) Act
2008

5. Sexual offences Act

6. Forensic Interviewing

7. Interviewing and Interrogating

8. Interviewing of Children

9. Statement recording and Report writing


--- page break ---

3/15
10. Psychological development of children
11. Emotional Intelligence
12. Psychological teachings and learnings
13. Videotaping of Interviews
14, Customer Service
15. Team Building
16. Stress Management
17. Process and Operations (Walking through how we will work together) The Child
18. Protection Unit and Children’s Authority
6. DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITES
Superintendent
1. Directs and co-ordinates the operations of the Child Protection Unit. This involves:
I. Ensuring the implementation of policies and adherence of rules, regulations and service
orders;
II. | Devising work plans/schedules;
Ill. Monitoring and reviewing work performed by staff and providing technical advice and
guidance in respect of complex matters;
IV. Identifying training needs and recommending and implementing suitable training
programmes for staff development;
V. Performing personnel functions such as:-
a) Appraising and evaluating staff performance;
b) Recommending staff promotion and transfers;
c) Approving applications for leave in accordance with departmental policies and
guidelines;
d) Certifying travelling and other claims;
e) Initiating disciplinary proceedings, as required.
2. Tocollaborate with the Children’s Authority and to provide assistance.
3. Makes policy recommendations with respect to the operations of the Child Protection Unit.
4. Investigates/directs the investigation of complex criminal matters, major or fatal road traffic
accidents and occurrences such as fires and suicides and submits reports thereon.
5. Visits Child Protection Units in all Police Divisions and inspects log books/registers/other
documents, buildings equipment and machinery to ensure conformity to departmental
regulations, guidelines and standards.


--- page break ---

4/15

6. Lectures to police officers on department’ regulations, policies, implications of new or
amended laws and new techniques of police work and to schools and community groups on
crime prevention and related issues.

7. Prepares Annual Draft Estimates of Expenditure for the Child Protection Unit.

8. Performs general police duties such as traffic and crowd control, arresting and laying charges
against violators of law, executing warrants, serving summonses and attending court as
complainant or witness as required.

9. Functions as a Tribunal Officer for Disciplinary matters of police officers as delegated by the
Commissioner of Police.

10. Represents the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service at meetings, conferences, seminars and
workshops.

11. Directs/conducts searches of vehicles, premises and suspicious persons.

12. Directs and coordinates large-scale police exercises.

13. Generally perform the duties of a Superintendent as per Departmental Order 64/2001

Assistant Superintendent of Police
1. Assists the Superintendent of Police in managing the operations of the Child Protection Unit. This
involves:
I. Directing the implementation of policies, procedures and adherence to rules, regulations
and service orders;
Il. Implementing work plans for the Child Protection Unit
III. | Monitoring and reviewing work performed by staff and providing technical advice and
guidance;
IV. Performing personnel functions such as:-
a) Identifying and directing staff training needs of the Child Protection Unit.
b) Appraising and evaluating staff performance.
c) Recommending staff promotion and transfers.
d) Initiating disciplinary action as required.
2. Makes recommendations with respect to the operational procedures of the Child Protection Unit.
3. Investigates/directs the investigation of complex criminal matters, major/fatal road traffic
accidents and occurrences such as fires and suicides and submit reports to Superintendent of
Police Child Protection Unit.


--- page break ---

5/15

4. Visits Sub- Units within assigned Police Divisions and inspects log books/registers/other
documents, buildings, equipment and machinery to ensure conformity to departmental
regulations, guidelines and standards.

5. Lectures to police officers on departments ‘regulations, policies, implications of new or amended
laws and new techniques of police work and to schools and community groups on crime
prevention.

6. Assists in the preparation of Annual Draft Estimates of Expenditure for the Child Protection Unit
by reviewing and compiling data on expenditure for Sub-Units within each Police Division.

7. Conducts audits of sub-units and monthly inspections of vehicles within assigned Police
Divisions.

8. Performs general police duties from time to time such as traffic and crowded control, arresting
and laying charges against violators of the law, executing warrants and serving summonses and
attending court as complainant or witness.

9. Ensure that all reports and occurrences involving children are properly investigated and reports
with recommendations are submitted in a timely manner.

10. To conduct case conferences with Juveniles and other offenders to resolve conflicts when
necessary and to mediate in matters which do not necessitate court action.

11. Generally perform the duties of an Assistant Superintendent as per Departmental Order 64/2001

Police Inspector
1. Supervise the activities of the Child Protection Unit in an assigned Division.
i) Devise work schedules and assign duties.
ii) Monitor/review work performed by junior staff.
il) Appraise and evaluate the performance of staff.
iv) Recommend the appropriate training for staff.
v) Initiate disciplinary action.
vi) Approve applications for leave.
2. Ensure that operations involving children are in conformity with established policies and procedures.
3. Guide junior officers in investigating criminal matters involving children.
4. Lecture to junior officers on regulations, policies and implications of new or amended laws and
techniques of interest to the Child Protection Unit.
5. In collaboration with Community Police sections lecture to schools and community groups on
specific aspects, functions and objectives of the Child Protection Unit and the Children’s Authority.


--- page break ---

6/15
6. Inspect police log books, registers, documents, equipment and machinery assigned to the Child
Protection Unit to ensure conformity to Departmental regulations, guidelines and standards.
7. Prepare assigned cases for Court by compiling/reviewing all documents and submit to relevant
authorities.
8. Attend Court and Court Orderly Room to give evidence as a Complainant or Witness.
9. Submit status reports on the operations of the Child Protection Unit and make recommendations for
improvements to Supervisor or the Head of the Child Protection Unit.
10. Review and certify correspondence, reports and other documents prepared by junior staff.
11. In collaboration with Community Policing Section, plan, design and coordinate programmes for
communities, groups and individuals with particular emphasis on the care and protection of children.
12. Ensure that all records and statistics involving children are properly prepared and maintained.
13. Prepare and direct correspondence and reports for the necessary action.
14. Perform other duties related to the office which may be assigned from time to time.
Police Sergeant
1. Supervise and co-ordinate the activities of the Child Protection Unit (CPU) within a given Division.
i) Devise work schedules and assign duties
ii) Monitor and review work performed by staff
iii) Appraise and evaluate the performance of staff
iv) Provide guidance and recommend the appropriate training for staff
v) Grant time-off and approve leave
vi) Initiate disciplinary action
vii) Ensure that all reports involving children are recorded and attended to promptly, by
dispatching officers and communicating with the Child Service Associate/Children’s
Authority Representative.
2. Supervise and coordinate all communications with the Children’s Authority.


--- page break ---

7/15

3. Communicate and collaborate with the Child Services Associate (CSA)/Children’s Authority
Representative, in relation to all cases involving children.

4. Assist, guide, coordinate and direct junior officers with all investigations, where a child is in need of
care and protection.

5. Ensure that a written interim report of all matters involving children is submitted without delay,
within twenty-four (24) hours to the Head of the Child Protection Unit (CPU).

6. Coordinate and supervise the searches of scenes and its peripheries for evidence relating to any
enquiry or investigation involving children.

7. Conduct lectures to members of the Child Protection Unit (CPU) on updates, police ethics,
investigative procedures, community relations, customer service, the legal framework and the
techniques and skills and strategies required for practice.

8. Work together with members of the Child Protection Unit (CPU and the Children’s Authority in an
effort to solve community problems with respect to the care and protection of children.

9. Monitor and visit child victims, such as, those undergoing treatment at health institutions.

10. Obtain evidence and arrest suspects who have perpetrated crimes against children.

11. Check/review reports submitted by junior staff for evidence to substantiate legal proceedings.

12. Attend Court and Court Orderly-Room as a Complainant or Witness.

13. Examine and certify police log books/registers/abstracts and pocket diaries to ensure that
entries/reports are recorded in accordance with regulations/established procedures.

14, Plan and coordinate specific operations such as, searches of vehicles/buildings or persons held for the
commission of offences against children.

15. Identify the need for and arrange social and/or psychological support for victims of domestic violence
through communications with the Children’s Authority.

16. Supervise and coordinate the meeting of the Children’s Services Associate (CSA) at a selected
location whenever the CSA is required to go into “Hotspot” areas, or where a situation may be
deemed volatile.

17. Maintain records of personnel, equipment, child victims, juvenile prisoners, complaints and reports
and prepare weekly/monthly returns for submission to the Head of the Child Protection Unit.


--- page break ---

8/15

18. Gather and collate all statistical data on child offenders.

19. Ensure that warnings to children reasonably suspected of using or being in the possession of tobacco
products or alcohol are conducted and that the Children’s Authority, the parent, guardian or the
person with responsibility for the child is immediately notified.

20. Whenever it becomes necessary for a child to be taken to a place of safety, take the necessary action
and inform the Head of the Child Protection Unit within twenty-four (24) hours of the action taken.

21. Plan and develop strategies for the development of the Child Protection Unit (CPU).

22. Meet with the Head of the Child Protection Unit (CPU) weekly.

23. Plan and develop training programmes for Police Officers attached to the Child Protection Unit; that
will develop and enhance their effectiveness in dealing with all reports.

24. Perform other duties related to the office which may be assigned from time to time.

Police Corporal

1. Supervise the activities of Police Constables assigned to a shift/team in the Child Protection Unit.

i) Devise work schedules and assign duties

ii) Conduct regular inspections of pocket diaries and police identification cards

iii) Ensure that all reports involving children are recorded and attended to promptly. In addition
to communicating with a Child Services Associate/ children’s Authority representative.

2. Supervise all communications between supervisees and the Children’s Authority.

3. Supervise all reports and investigations and the submissions of files/reports, involving reports where
child/children are victim/s.

4. Meet/liaise with a Child Services Associate (CSA)/Children’s Authority representative at a

designated location, in relation to a matter under investigation.

5. Conduct and supervise the searches of scenes and its peripheries for evidence relating to any enquiry

or investigation involving children.

6. Ensure that interim reports of a serious nature involving children are submitted without delay for

onward transmission to the Head of the Child Protection Unit (CPU).


--- page break ---

9/15

7. Conduct lectures to members of the Child’s Protection Unit (CPU) on updates, police ethics,
investigative methods, community relations and customer service.

8. Submit reports on daily activities of the Child Protection Unit (CPU) to the SDO I/c and ensure that
weekly returns are submitted.

9. Attend Court and Court Orderly-Room as a Complainant or Witness.

10. Monitor and visit child victims such as those undergoing treatment at health institutions.

11. Identify the need for and arrange social or psychological support for victims of domestic violence
through communications with the Children’s Authority.

12. Supervise and coordinate meetings with the Child Services Associate (CSA), at selected locations
whenever the CSA is required to go into “Hotspot” areas.

13. Record reports and entries, serve summonses and execute warrants and other official documents as
maybe directed to do from time to time by the relevant authority.

14. Assume the responsibility for the management of the Child Protection Unit in the absence of the
Supervisor.

15. Gather and collate all statistical data on child offenders.

16. Issue warnings to children suspected of using being in the possession of tobacco products or alcohol,
and immediately notify the Children’s Authority, the parent, guardian or the person with
responsibility for the child.

17. Whenever it becomes necessary for a child to be taken to a place of safety inform the SDO i/c of the
circumstances immediately upon receipt of such information.

18. Ensure that all serious matters/cases/reports are completed and submitted and an interim report is
submitted to the SDO i/c.

19. Ensure that Complainants submit case files, within one (1) week of charging person/s for offence/s in
compliance with Standing Order #10, Section 5 (1).

20. Assist in developing strategies for the development of the Child Protection Unit (CPU).

....../10
%


--- page break ---

10/15

21. Generally, to do and perform other duties related to the office which may be assigned from time to
time.

Police Constable

1. Respond immediately to all reports involving children and ensure that proper and thorough
investigations/enquiries are conducted into all reports whether walk-ins, via telephone or
correspondence.

2. Consult with the SDO i/c immediately upon receipt of all reports involving child victims or suspects.

3. Meet with a Child Services Associate (CSA)/Children’s Authority representative at a designated
location in relation to matters under investigation.

4. Conduct searches of scenes and its peripheries for evidence relating to any enquiry or investigation
involving children.

5. Immediately submit without delay an interim report in writing, of all reports of a serious nature
involving children for onward transmission to the Head of the Child Protection Unit (CPU).

6. Conduct investigations of persons suspected of offences perpetrated against children. Interview
suspects and immediately submit reports to supervisor.

7. Attend Court and Court Orderly-Room as a Complainant or Witness.

8. Monitor and visit child victims such as those undergoing treatment at health institutions.

9. Record reports, serve summons and execute warrants and other official documents as directed from
time to time by the relevant authority.

10. Identify the need for social or psychological support for victims of abuse through communication
with the shift supervisor.

11. Issue warnings to children suspected of using or being in the possession of tobacco products or
alcohol and immediately notify shift supervisor.

12. Whenever it becomes necessary for a child to be taken to a place of safety inform the SDO i/c
immediately of the circumstances of the case.

vvzeedl U1]


--- page break ---

11/15

13. Submit all case file/s, within one (1) week of charging person/s for offence/s in compliance with
Standing Order #10, Section 5 (1).

14. Assist in developing strategies for the development of the Child Protection Unit (CPU).

Generally, to do and perform other duties related to the office, which may be assigned from time
to time.

7. REQUIREMENTS
Personnel Attached to the Child Protection Unit (CPU) shall be required to submit
themselves to bi-annual or as is determined necessary, to the under mentioned procedures as
a means of validation:-
a. Psychometric Test
b. Proficiency Test
c. Medical Examination

8. GENERAL
The establishment of the child Protection Unit (CPU) is a clear indication of the resolve of
the Executive of the TTPS as we continue with initiatives in the fight against crime. It is
important that we should focus on the safety, care and protection of the nation’s children our
best investment. As to make every place safe and to provide a caring approach to the
sensitivity of crime, it is our duty to act with professionalism, tact and good judgment in how
we respond to criminal issues affecting children.
As we execute plans, let us all be united in our effort, relentless in our pursuit and selfless in
our purpose. May God bless us as we work in partnership with our citizens of Trinidad and
Tobago.

PART Ii — NIL
csi
