Police Orders by Mr. James Philbert 
Commissioner of Police (Ag) 
Police Administration Building 
Corner Edward & Sackville Streets 
Port of Spain 
Thursday 2°d October 2008 
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian 
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press) 
No. 196 Departmental Order PART I - NIL 
PART ll 
Establishment of the Commissioner 's Professional Management Secretariat 
1 INFORMATION 
In the recent past, members of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service have been 
the recipient of scathing criticisms by Stakeholders for being disrespectful , 
inefficient, incompetent and discourteous . They were also concerned about issues 
of impropriety and mismanagement of government resources. The change in 
leadership in the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service effective 5th July 2008 , 
following the appointment of the Commissioner of Police brings with it, the 
promised change leadership style in the Theme uchanging the wqv we ilo 
business". In this regard the Commissioner of Police has established the 
Commissioner ~s Profe.§sional Management Secretariat. (hereinafter called uThe 
Secretariat") 
2 INTENTION 
The designed intention of this order is to establish the functions of ''TIJe 
Secretariat" and to succinctly outline the approacp the Commissioner of Pol~ce 
proposes to adopt in the effective leadership and management of members of the 
Executive, Police Officers and Civilian employees and coordinate relationships 
with external agencies in an effort to restore the corporate image, and regain the 
confidence of our stakeholders. 
. . ./2 



196/2 
A METHODOLOGY 
To achieve its mandate the Commissioner 's Professional Managem ent Secretariat 
shaH­
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
c) 
f) 
g) 
Research and provide empirical data in a timely manner to influence the 
senior planning operatives of the Commiss ioner and his Executive Team . 
Engage the membership of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and 
Community based Organizations to map out solutions to meet existing 
challenges. 
Examine systems for recruitmen t employed regionally and internationally 
with a view to establishing international best practices for recruitment of 
applicants for entry into the organization. 
Establish alliances with Non-Governmental Organizations and Corporate 
Trinidad and Tobago to promote meaningful Police Public Relations 
Projects. 
Identify suitable candidates from outside the Police Service with the 
necessary capabilities for recru itment into the organization and from within 
the organization with the potential for Developmental Training designed for 
lateral movement, upward mobility and succession planning. 
Establish a resettlement plan for officers departing the organization. 
Establish support services for former Police Officers. 
Perform any other activities as directed by the Commissioner of Police. 
A ADMINISTRATION 
"The Secretariat" shall be under the direct supervis ion of the Commissioner of 
Police who shall employ a manager on contract and a coordinator who shall be a 
police officer. This Team would be supported by the Head Human Resource and 
members of her staff as deemed appropriate. 
The established strength of the secretariat shall consist as follows-: 
Manager A.S.P Inspector Sergeants Corporals Constables Total 
1 1 1 2 3 4 12 
.. .13 



196/3 
5. LOCATION 
"The Secretariat" will be housed on the 6th Floor Police Administration Building, 
Corner Edward and Sackville Streets, Port-of-Spain 
6. GENERAL 
The Manager of "The Secretariat" is empowered to periodically co-opt other 
professionals from outside and within the Service on a temporary basis from time to 
time who can add value or bring the reqwsite skil1s to ongoing projects. This must 
be done in accordance with the protocols established in the Service. 
7. CONCLUSION 
The transformation of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service requires the full 
cooperation and participation of its publics. Consequently, one would recognize a 
modification in the leadership style. There are indeed some chaJienges which we all 
agree are not beyond our capabilities if we work together. However, as we change 
the way we do business, let us keep "Service" as our watchword, and put our trust 
in God as we move towards rebuilding the image of the Trinidad and Tobago Police 
Service and the confidence of the Citizenry of our Country. 