C2)
bet Police Orders by Mr. Gary Griffith
Commissioner of Police
Police Administration Building
ann pliant Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
% ow Port of Spain
PROTECT :
Wr PRIDE Friday 25" January, 2019
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
No. 19 Departmental Order PART I - NIL
PART II
OVERTIME MANAGEMENT
Police Officers in the Second Division generally are not required to work in excess of forty hours
per week. However exigencies may require officers to work beyond that normal requirement.
To reduce the high incidence and abuse of overtime, prudent management of the process pertaining
to the working of overtime must be adhered to. As such, the guidelines for the management of
overtime is re-emphasized.
Methodology

e Overtime generally as indicated above, will only be occasioned when an unforeseen
situation has develop which can best be addressed by authorising an officer(s) to
work in excess of forty-hours in any one week. The need for overtime must be
sufficiently justified.

e When such occasion arises, the authority to work overtime must, be obtained from
the Divisional/Branch Commander. However, if such permission cannot be
obtained from the Commander, then the permission to work overtime shall be given
by the next senior officer, not below the rank of Assistant Superintendent to work
overtime in the absence of the Commanding Officer of the Division/Branch.

e In instances where overtime is authorised by an officer other than the officer in
charge of the Division/Branch, that officer shall inform the Divisional/Branch
Commander, as soon as it is practical to do so of the authorisation given and the
rationale for so doing.

e Authority given to work overtime must be recorded in the Station Diary and if
necessary in the Telephone Message Book, together with the circumstances which
led to such a decision. The number of hours sanctioned to be worked as overtime
must be clearly stated by the authorising officer.


--- page break ---

19/2
e The officer who is detailed to work overtime must also make the relevant entry in his/her
pocket diary attesting to the authority granted to work overtime, as well as to the circumstances
which led to the overtime. The authorising officer must sign that entry.
Administration
e All Second Division Officers shall maintain an ‘Abstract of Duties” register in which all duties
performed shall be recorded. The Second Division Officer in charge (S.D.O i/c) shall inspect and
sign that register by 8:00am daily, for the purpose of verifying the entries therein.
e The claimant, immediately following the end of the work week in which overtime was
worked, shall submit the relevant claim to the Second Division Officer in charge.
e The S.D.O i/c must, within seven (7) days thoroughly check each claim to verify their
authenticity by examining the relevant entries in the Station Diary, as well as the related entries
in the officer’s pocket diary and abstract.
e The diary reference as well as a brief statement in relation to the rationale for the overtime
must be stated in the appropriate column on the claim form.
e The S.D.O i/c shall, before the expiration of four weeks after the accrual of the overtime, grant
compensatory ‘time off” if possible, to the claimant in lieu of payment.
e ’Time Off” shall be granted on a straight time basis, that is to say that the compensatory leave
will be equal to the excess hours worked. Where it is impractical to grant “time off”, the S.D.O
i/c shall submit the claims to the Divisional Commander for payment.
e In submitting claims to the Divisional Commander the SDO i/c shall submit a breakdown of
overtime claims showing period of time, the number of hours for each officer and the total
overtime claimed for the station.
e The Divisional Commander, once satisfied that the claim is genuine, shall within fourteen
(14)days, sign and refer it to the Senior Superintendent Finance Branch who shall be responsible
for the authorising the payment of overtime claims. In addition to the submission to the

vhs


--- page break ---

19/3
Senior Superintendent Finance Branch, the Senior Superintendent shall submit to
the Deputy Commissioner Administration on a monthly basis a breakdown of the
overtime claimed for the division showing the number of hours per station, broken
down in ranks and the financial cost.

e Divisional Commanders, Station Commanders and Overtime Leave Clerks are to
ensure that they familiarise themselves with the database provided at each Station
and Divisional Commander’s office to facilitate the management of overtime.

e Incalculating overtime hours, “time and a half” (1) hours is only applied after an
Officer would have completed his/her forty hour work week and that Officer is
summoned to continue working beyond his/her completed forty hour work week
on:

a. His/ Her Rest Day
b. Public Holidays
e Except in special circumstances, no overtime claim shall be allowed if submitted
after six months from the date the overtime was earned.
PART III - NIL
SF Eu
Commissioner of Police
