Ke?) Police Orders by Mr. Gary Griffith

AY Commissioner of Police
TS Port of Spain
teal Friday 4" September, 2020

(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian employees of

the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
No. 137 Departmental Order PARTS | & III — NIL
PART II
ENTITLEMENT TO LEAVE FOR SUSPENDED/INTERDICTED OFFICERS
1. INFORMATION

1.1. There currently exists, within the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service, a number
of officers on suspension or interdiction whilst awaiting the completion of
disciplinary or criminal proceedings which have been instituted against them.
Consequently, it has become necessary to create a policy to address the various
issues that may arise whilst an officer is on suspension/interdiction.

1.2 “basic salary” means pay as defined by Section 3 of the Police Service Act,
Chapter 15:01 in addition to any applicable allowances which an officer is
entitled to whilst on extended leave inclusive of the following: Housing
Allowance, Cost of Living Allowance, Meal Allowance.

2. INTENTION

This policy seeks to provide clarity on the entitlements of a suspended/interdicted officer
and how the various administrative departments should treat with same.

3. ACCUMULATION OF VACATION LEAVE WHILST ON SUSPENSION

3.1 A suspended/interdicted officer is not performing his duties pursuant to the
Police Service Regulations and, therefore, is not entitled to earn vacation leave
or any other leave.

3.2. No officer shall accumulate vacation leave or any other leave whilst on
suspension or interdiction from the date of the said suspension.

4. LEAVE ACCRUED PRIOR TO SUSPENSION

A suspended/interdicted officer is entitled to the vacation leave and any other gratuitous

and/or compensatory leave which he has earned prior to the date of his

suspension/interdiction.


--- page break ---

137/2
5. SALARY IN LIEU OF VACATION LEAVE

| An officer shall not proceed on vacation leave or any other gratuitous and/or
compensatory leave whilst he is on suspension/interdiction.

5.2 Where an officer has earned vacation leave or any other gratuitous and/or
compensatory leave prior to his suspension/interdiction and he is not permitted
to proceed on the said leave, he shall be paid his basic salary for the period of
leave he was entitled to but not permitted to take, provided he is no longer
capable of being a serving member of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service
(hereinafter “TTPS”).

5.3. Compensation for leave accumulated prior to a suspension/interdiction shall be
calculated based on the rate of salary applicable to the officer at the time the
said leave was accumulated and in accordance with the applicable
Remuneration Order(s) up to the time of the suspension/interdiction.

5.4 Compensation for leave accumulated prior to a suspension/interdiction shall be
subject to tax and include any applicable allowances to which the officer was
entitled if he had proceeded on leave.

5.5 Where an officer has been on suspension/interdiction and returns to active
service after the determination of his criminal/disciplinary proceedings, he shall
be required to utilise any outstanding vacation leave or any other gratuitous
leave and/or compensatory leave that he has accumulated prior to the said
proceedings.

6. COMMENCING ON PRE-RETIREMENT LEAVE

6.1 An officer shall not proceed on pre-retirement leave whilst he is on
suspension/interdiction.

6.2 Pre-retirement leave for a suspended/interdicted officer shall represent only the
leave earned prior to the officer’s date of suspension/interdiction.

6.3 Where an officer is entitled to proceed on pre-retirement leave, but for his
suspension, and he is consequently prohibited to proceed on same, he shall be
paid his salary for the leave he was entitled to during the pre-retirement period,
pursuant to 5.2, 5.3 and 5.4.

wah


--- page break ---

137/3

7. COMPENSATION FOR THE LOSS OF THE OPPORTUNITY TO EARN
LEAVE AND OTHER BENEFITS DURING SUSPENSION/INTERDICTION
WHERE PROCEEDINGS ARE CONCLUDED PRIOR TO AN OFFICER’S
RETIREMENT
7.1 Where there is a finding of innocence in respect of a criminal charge or a

disciplinary offence against a suspended/interdicted officer, he is entitled to be
compensated for any loss to his basic salary.

Ted Where there is a finding of innocence in respect of a criminal charge or a
disciplinary offence against a suspended/interdicted officer, he is entitled to the
vacation leave he would have been entitled to earn, but for the
suspension/interdiction.

7.3. Where there is a finding of innocence in respect of a criminal charge or a
disciplinary offence against a suspended/interdicted officer, and he is unable to
utilise part or all of the vacation leave that has been credited to him pursuant to
7.2., as a result of his retirement, he shall be paid an amount equivalent to his
basic salary per month over the particular period, in lieu of vacation for the
unutilised leave.

7.4. Where there is a finding of guilt in respect of a criminal charge against an officer
and he is removed from the Service, he is not entitled to any compensation.

75 Where there is a finding of guilt in respect of a disciplinary offence, which
results in the dismissal of the officer, he is not entitled to any compensation.

7.6 Disciplinary proceedings shall be dealt with in such a manner to permit the
officer the opportunity to earn leave or any of the other attendant benefits of
active service that he cannot access as a result of his suspension/interdiction.

8. COMPENSATION FOR THE LOSS OF THE OPPORTUNITY TO EARN
LEAVE AND OTHER BENEFITS DURING SUSPENSION/INTERDICTION
WHERE PROCEEDINGS ARE CONCLUDED AFTER AN OFFICER’S
RETIREMENT
8.1 An officer who is suspended/interdicted pending the outcome of criminal

proceedings shall not be entitled to any compensation pursuant to 7.1, 7.2 and
7.3 if the criminal matter is determined after his retirement.

8.2. Where there has been no determination of guilt in respect of allegations of a
disciplinary offence against a suspended/interdicted officer at the time of his
retirement, he is entitled to the same compensation as an officer who had been
found innocent prior to retirement, pursuant to 6.1, 6.2 and 6.3.


--- page break ---

: "
137/4
9. CONCLUSION
Suspension and Interdiction form part of the disciplinary process and may be required
in the interest of justice, for the public interest and for the reputation of the Police
Service. However, an officer should not be unduly prejudiced by these procedures,
especially when there is no finding of guilt against him. The above policy is intended
to serve as a guideline which governs the treatment of suspended and interdicted
officers. Further to this, with the requisite adherence, it should strike a balance between
the abovementioned interests and the interest of such officers.
Commissioner of Police
