(SS) Police Orders by Mr. Gary Griffith

iat Commissioner of Police

aK Police Administration Building

. Ve Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
2 el Port of Spain.
ete Wednesday 17" July, 2019.

This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian employees of the Police Service

and is not for publication in the Press or for distribution in the public domain.

No. 127 Departmental Order PART I- Nil

PART II
THE AMALGAMATION OF THE ORGANIZED CRIME INTELLIGENCE UNIT
(O.C.1.U), HUMAN TRAFFICKING UNIT (H.T.U), TERRORISM INVESTIGATION
UNIT (T.1.U) AND GANG ENFORCEMENT TEAM (G.E.T) TO ESTABLISH THE
SPECIAL INVESTIGATIONS UNIT (S.1.U)

This Departmental Order No. 127 of 2019 rescinds Departmental Order No. 144/2017 Re:

Establishment of the Organized Crime Intelligence Unit (O.C.I.U), Departmental Order No.

103/2012 Re: Trafficking in Human Act No. 14 of 2011 and any _ other

Order/Directive/instruction regarding the administration and _ operation of the

aforementioned units with immediate effect.

1. BACKGROUND
In keeping with the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service (TTPS) 2019-2021 strategic
vision, the Commissioner of Police (COP) and his Executive have embarked upon a total
transformation and modernizing of the TTPS. This process involves but is not limited to
organizational restructure, expansion of the TTPS Executive, re-engineering of the
business processes of certain units and the alignment of various units/departments.
Pursuant to the above and coupled with the growing concerns regarding local and foreign
gangs, trafficking in narcotics, proliferation of firearms, trafficking in persons, terrorism
1


--- page break ---

. among other serious organized crimes, it has become necessary to amalgamate the
aforementioned units to effectively and successfully investigate and prosecute the
aforementioned crimes in keeping with our legal, national, regional and international
obligations.

Currently, the human resource capacity of the aforementioned units is inadequate to
successfully investigate, prosecute and dismantle gangs and serious organized crimes and
facilitate expeditious investigations and prosecutions. The respective units are unable to
conduct simultaneous, focused and sustained investigation on multiple criminal enterprises
which are urgently needed.
2. ESTABLISHMENT
The Commissioner of Police and his Executive management have taken a strategic and
operational decision to amalgamate the Organized Crime Intelligence Unit (O.C.LU),
Human Trafficking Unit (H.T.U.), Terrorism Investigation Unit (T.I.U) and the Gang
Enforcement Team (G.E.T) to establish the Special Investigations Unit (S.I.U) in the
Trinidad and Tobago Police Service (TTPS) effective 17 July, 2019.
With the promulgation of this Departmental Order, the O.C.I.U, H.T.U, T.LU and G.E.T
shall become defunct and the personnel and resources assigned to the respective units shall
be absorbed into the S.I.U. However, the personnel from the respective units may be
subjected to further security vetting and background checks.
The amalgamation of the O.C.LU, H.T.U, T.I.U and G.E.T to establish the S.I.U in the
TTPS do not affect or prejudice any ongoing court proceedings or investigations.
The S.I.U main administrative office is located at Mirror Building, Richmond Street, Port
of Spain with sub-offices to be subsequently published.
3. JUSTIFICATION
The establishment of the S.I.U would enhance the TTPS capability to effectively honour
our legal, national, regional and international obligations and positively respond to the
public demand for professional policing, increase detection rates and successful
investigations and prosecutions of gangs and persons involved in serious organized crimes.
The O.C.I.U, H.T.U, T.I.U and G.E.T utilizes similar investigatory instruments and
methods of operations and in some instances, focuses on the same gangs or persons
involved in serious organized crimes. In the instance, the amalgamation would effectively
2


--- page break ---

; facilitate the union of all available human and other resources to successfully investigate,
prosecute, disrupt and dismantle gangs and persons involved in serious organized crimes
nationally and those that are transnational in nature.

The amalgamation is consistent with the recommendations contained in the Cabinet
Appointed Police Manpower Audit Committee’s Report dated October 17, 2017
pages 33-47 and specifically, the need to review the number of Units & Branches in the
TTPS for more effective management of officers and allocation of resources.
4. CLASSIFICATION
The S.L.U is classified as a Class 1 Specialist Unit. Personnel assigned/posted to the S.I.U
may be required to undergo specialized training and development and would be
continuously assessed in the core competencies listed at paragraph 9 of_this
Departmental Order.
5. CORE MANDATE

The S.I.U main focus is to investigate and prosecute gangs and persons involved in serious
organized crimes nationally and those that are transnational in nature with the aim of
successfully disrupting and dismantling gangs and criminal enterprises with particular
emphasis on the offences listed in the First Schedule of the Anti-Gang Act, No. 1 of
2018.
It shall be noted that the establishment of the S.LU do not relinquish the duties of the
Criminal Investigation Division (C.I.D), other Specialist Units/Sections and Operational
Units to investigate and prosecute gangs, persons involved in serious crimes and organized
crimes.
However, the S.I.U shall have oversight and may exercise supervisory jurisdiction
regarding investigations into gangs and persons involved in serious organized crimes
conducted by the C.I.D, other Specialist Units/Sections and Operational Units.

3


--- page break ---

. 6. MAIN FUNCTIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

a. To investigate and prosecute gangs and persons involved in serious organized
crimes nationally and those that are transnational in nature with the aim of
successfully disrupting and dismantling gangs and criminal enterprises.

b. Partner with other Law Enforcement and Intelligence Agencies locally, regionally
and internationally in multiparty investigations regarding gangs and persons
involved in serious organized crimes nationally and those that are transnational in
nature with the aim of successfully disrupting and dismantling gangs and criminal
enterprises.

c. Initiate and coordinate joint investigations regarding gangs and persons involved in
serious and organized crimes with the Criminal Investigation Division (C.I.D),
Specialist Units/Sections and Operational Units.

d. Disseminate information/intelligence/evidence obtained/derived in the course of
investigations to other investigative and operational units within the TTPS and to
other Law Enforcement and Intelligence Agencies locally, regionally and
internationally through established protocols for the detection, investigation and
prosecution of crimes.

e. Oversight and supervisory jurisdiction including the authority to request
information regarding investigations of gangs and persons involved in serious and
organized crimes conducted by the Criminal Investigation Division (C.I.D), other
Specialist Units/Sections and Operational Units to increase the possibility of
successful investigations and prosecutions.

f. Conduct lectures, workshops and seminars with other TTPS Divisions, Branches,
Sections/Units, Law Enforcement and _ Intelligence Agencies, State
Agencies/Departments to share information and build awareness for the detection,
investigation and gathering of evidence to facilitate successful investigation and
prosecution of gangs and persons involved in serious and organized crimes.

g. Develop and implement relevant social intervention initiatives and programs with
the assistance of State Agencies/Departments, Non-Governmental Organizations
and the Private Sector, to prevent persons especially the youth, from getting
involved in gangs and serious and organized crimes.

4


--- page break ---

; h. Develop and implement demand reduction and public awareness programs and
strategies in keeping with our obligations under:
e The Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961
e The Convention on Psychotropic Substances 1971
e The United Nations (UN) Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
e The United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
2004.
i. Any other function or responsibility to achieve the core mandate of the S.LU or any
function/ responsibility/ special assignment authorized by the Commissioner of Police.
7. EXTERNAL PARTNERS
The S.I.U external partners includes but is not limited to the under mentioned:
e Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP)
e Strategic Services Agency (SSA)
e Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU)
e Ministry of National Security- Counter Trafficking Unit and Immigration Division
e Transnational Organized Crime Unit (TOCU)
e Ministry of Finance- Customs and Excise Division
e Trinidad and Tobago Defence Force (TTDF)
e Trinidad and Tobago Prisons Service (TTPrS)
e Children’s Authority of Trinidad and Tobago
e Ministry of the Attorney General- Central Authority
8. ADMINISTRATIVE STRUCTURE
The Commissioner of Police (COP) have overall responsibility for the S.LU. The Head of
the S.I.U shall report to the Commissioner of Police or through an officer authorized by
him acting under and in accordance with his general or specific instructions.
RANK/OFFICE SANCTIONED
STRENGTH
5


--- page break ---

. Assistant Superintendents ee eee
[Inspector
Legal Officers
Qualified Analysts
Qualified Transcriptionists | 6s
The S.I.U shall be complemented with Six (6) Business Operations Assistants to assist in
the administrative functions and other related matters.
However, the S.I.U may include other officers and support staff/personnel pending
authorization from the Commissioner of Police.
9. CORE COMPETENCIES
The core competencies to perform the functions of the S.I-U shall include but are not
limited to the following: integrity, managing performance, leadership, employee relations,
teamwork, achieving results, organizational awareness, networking, customer service,
problem solving and effective communication.
10. RECRUITMENT & SELECTION
Personnel desirous of being considered for recruitment into the S.I.U shall submit a written
application to the Senior Superintendent of Police in charge of the S.I.U (application to
be published on the TTPS Portal) and may be required to undergo:
a. Entrance Examination
b. Proficiency Test
c. Interview
d. Physical Evaluation
e. Psychometric Test
f. Drug Test
g. Polygraph Test
6


--- page break ---

4
8 h. Security Vetting/Background Checks.
11. GENERAL
This Departmental Order provides a framework for the establishment and operation of the
S.I.U. However, the Commissioner of Police may amend this Departmental Order or enact
additional Orders/ or issue further Directives to achieve the core mandate and enhance the
efficiency and effectiveness of the S.I.U.
12. AUTHORITY
This Departmental Order is enacted pursuant to Section 193 (1) (b) of the Police Service
Regulations, 2007.
PART III — NIL
Commissioner of Police
7
