Police Orders by 
Commissioner of Police 
Police Administration Building 
Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets 
Port of Spain 
Tuesday 28th July 2009 
(fhis is an official document entrusted to members and civilian 
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press) 
Departmental Order PART I- NIL 
PART II 
Esta blishment of Fleet Management Standing Committee in the 
Trinida d and Tobago Police Service 
A Standing Committee for procurement of vehicles in the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service 
has been established. This committee has responsib ility to conduct 'Vehicle Needs Assessment' 
for the entire Police Service and procure vehicles to meet the required complement over time as 
necessary . 
The committee shall comprise the following members : 
• Head Administration Chairman 
• ACP Mobile and Transport Vice-Ch airman 
• Supt. Transport and Telecom 
• Sgt. Transport and Telecom 
PROCUREMENT OF VEHICLES 
1. Specification Development and sign-off 
The Chairman of the Standing Committee shall write to the Director ofMechanica l Services , 
Ministry of Works and Transport for sign-off on the specifications developed by the Standing 
Committee . This is in keeping with guidelines set for procurement in the Ministry of National 
Security. 
2. Approval for Procurement 
Once the specifications have been signed off by the Director , Mechan ical Services (MOWT) the 
Standing Committee shall send recommendations for vehicle procurement to the Commissioner 
of Police for Approval. 
3. Tende r Process 
This will then be forwarded to the Procurement Section Ministry ofNational Security , to verifY 
whether or not funds are available to initiate the tender process. This is usually through the 
Central Tenders Board . In some instances , VMCOTT is the procurement agency. 
4. Representation on tbe Central Tenders Board Committee 
The Representative on the Tenders Committee shall be the Head Administration and one other 
member from the Standing Committee . 
NB. It shall be the responsibility of the Senior Superintendent Finance Branch, to inform the 
Ministry ofNational Security and the Ceptral Tenders ~ard of the names of the representatives. 
/PART ID-1!/' , f 
JJlaAltAJ tG~~/t{ {i~ P 
~
1 .... iS"swner of Police 