No. 108 
Police Orders by Mr. Trevor Paul 
Commissioner of Police 
Police Administration Building 
Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets 
Port of Spain 
Wednesday 4 th July 2007 
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civiHan 
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press) 
Departmental Order PART I -NIL 
PART II 
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE LEGAL UNIT 
1. INFORMATION 
1: 1 The management of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service has established a Legal Unit 
in the service with effect from 2"d July 2007, as part of the ongoing transformation 
process. 
I :2 The legal unit shall consist of Police Officers who are Attorneys and officers who possess 
LLB degrees. 
1:3 The Commissioner shall assign legal officers to each Division, Specialist Units/Sec tions 
in the organization. 
1 :4 The Police Service has a fundamental duty to establish support systems, methods and 
structures to effectively manage its human, material and financial resources. 
2. INTENTION 
The intention of this order is to apprise members of the Police Service of the 
establishment of a legal unit, thus transforming the service into a more efficient and 
effective organization. 
3. ADMINISTRATION 
3: 1 The Deputy Commissioner of Police 'Strategic Planning and Development ' is responsible 
for the overall management and operation of the unit. 
3 :2 Heads of Divisions/Branches/Units shall be responsible for the day-to-day operations of 
the legal officers under their command .. 
3:3 Legal Officers attached to Divisions/Branches shall perform legal duties only, unless 
otherwise directed by the Head of the Division/Branch. 
3 :4 Heads of Divisions/Branches shall ensure that proper accommodation, including office 
facilities, furniture and other relevant materials, are provided to legal officers under their 
command. 
. . ./2 



108/2 
4 METHODOLOGY -Res ponsibilities 
4.1 Legal Officers shall:-
• Advise and assist the Exec utive of the Police Service on all lega l matter s 
that touch and concern the Police Service inclusive of legal opinions on 
matters that have major legal implication s. 
• Assist Police Prosecutors in the Magistrate's Court with cases that involve 
technical/difficult legal issues. 
• Assist in the training of Police Prosecu tors. 
• Lecture to members of the Police Service on legal matters relevant to the 
Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and assist in the preparation of legal 
training materials and programme s for the Police Training 
College / Academy. 
• Draft Part II Orders for the Commissioner of Police. 
• Assist/guide police officers in the day-to-day investigative process 
(particularly the operational units) with regard to offences and the 
ingredients necessary to estab lish same, together with the legal 
requirements in the cond uct of such investiga tions , thereby increasing the 
possibility/c hance of success ful prosecut ion of these offences. 
• Screen and assist in the preparation of case files for transmission to the 
office of the Director of Public Prosecutions thereby improving the quality 
of same. 
• Liaise with the Director of Public Prosec utions and other exte rnal legal 
and professional bodies Qn issues relevant to the Police Service. 
• Ass ist Police officers in the preparation of documents for paper committal 
proceedings. 
4.2 The functions of the officers who possess LLB degrees shaiJ include but not be limited to 
the provision of general assistance to the Legal Officers. 



.. ./3 
5. COMMUNICATION 
Heads of Divisions/Branches/Units, are to submit to the Deputy Commissioner of Police 
'Strategic Planning and Development' on a monthly basis, a return on the work 
performance and conduct of legal officers under their command. 
6. CONCLUSION 
The establishment of this unit will significantly enhance the management of the Police 
Service, thus improving its crime fighting capability. 