No. 17 
Police Orders by 
Commissioner of Police 
Police Administration Building 
Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets 
Port of Spain 
Wednesday 20th January 2010 
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian 
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press) 
Departmental Order PART I - NIL 
PART II 
VEHICLE PILOT PROJECT 
The Trinidad and Tobago Police Service is participating in a six (6) week GPS tracking, fuel 
management and camera surveillance pilot project with the Vehicle Management Co~oration of 
Trinidad and Tobago (VEMCOTT) . The project will run from the 15th January to 28 February, 
2010 and will equip ten (10) marked patrol vehicles with the following features: -
1. System Features 
• 24hr Real-Time Fleet Monitoring 
• Camera Surveillance 
• Route, Perimeter, Work Hour & Maintenance Planning 
• Real Time Email Alerts: 
o Speed Violations 
o Perimeter Violations 
o Accidents /Harsh Breaking 
o Excess Idling ... And More! 
• OTA (Over The Air) commands : 
o Shut Off Vehicle 
o Unlock Doors ... And More! 
• Scheduled Reporting: 
o Vehicle History 
o Workhours 
o Violations ... And More! 
2. GPS Tracking 
A GPS tracking unit is a device that uses the Global Positioning System to determine the precise 
location of a vehicle, person, or other asset to which it is attached and to record the position of 
the asset at regular intervals. 
The recorded location data can be stored within the tracking unit, or it may be transmitted to a 
central location data base, or internet-connected computer, using a cellular (GPRS), radio, or 
satellite modem embedded in the unit. 
This allows the asset's location to be displayed against a map backdrop either in real-time or 
when analyzing the track later, using customized software. The monitoring of the G.P.S system 
will be done by personnel from E999 Rapid Response Branch and the data and server equipment 
will be housed by the Police. 



17/2 
3. Camera Surveillance 
This component will outfit each vehicle with three {3) cameras. Two (2) attached to the front 
of the vehicle, one {I) facing the road, and the other towards the inner cabin and the last 
camera mounted to the rear of the cabin looking rearward. This video footage will be 
recorded and can be reviewed and archived. 
All vehicles will be outfitted with a Dallas Key (an immobilizer device) and all the outfitted 
equipment will automatically power on once the vehicle is started. The instaJlation will be 
tamper proof, and will send email notifications if problems are being detected. 
4. Fuel Management System 
This system will comprise a Rapid Frequency Identification Device (RFID) being mounted 
around the fuel inlet of the vehicle. For the purpose of this pilot project, only one fuel station 
will be used located at Tragarete Road, Port of Spain. The fuel station is outfitted with a 
R.F.I.D receiver so fuel can only be issued to an authorized vehicle. 
This technology will be used to monitor and track fuel inventories, fuel purchases and fuel 
dispensed to our Police vehicles. This information can then be stored in computerized 
systems and reports generated to address issues related to consumption control, cost analysis 
for fuel purchases, billing and payments. 
5. Benefits 
• Reduction in wear & tear costs associated with speeding, reckless driving, late servicing 
etc. 
• Reduction in fuel and labour costs associated with unproductive driving and personal 
business being carried out 
• Ability to verify the accuracy of response. 
• Improved ability to assist our customers. 
• Improved ability to resolve customer disputes related to arrival time, service duration etc. 
• Improved customer service. 
, PART 
~si · rofPolice ~ 