No. 101 
Information 
Police Orders by Dr. D. Gibbs 
Commissioner ofPolice 
Police Administration Building 
Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets 
Port of Spain 
Wednesday 25th May 2011 
; 
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian 
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press) 
Departmental Order PARTI-NJL 
PART IT 
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO 
POLICE SERVICE 
JUNGLE OPERATION & MARIJUANA ERADICATION POLICY 
As a result of the increase in crime over the past decade especially those involving firearms and illegal drugs~ 
the Police Service has had to respond in a robust and proactive manner to deal with the threat to the peace and 
security of all citizens and visitors to our beloved nation. 
To that end, one ofthe strategies adopted to deal with the situation was the formation of Task Forces at the 
Divisional and Regional levels. In an effort to modernize and improve the effectiveness and efficiency of all 
Task Forces, the following Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) shall be adopted and followed when 
operating in rural or urban areas:-
Intention 
The intention of this Order is to establish a clear policy and set administrative guidelines for the efficient and 
effective management and operation of all Task Forces and other units involved in crime suppression and 
eradication exercises. 
(i) COMMAND & CONTROL 
(a) All operations involving the use of a Task Force must be first authorized by a First Division Officer 
(FDO) who shall maintain supervisory control of all decisions and activities associated with the Unit 
(b) The Task Force operational commander sha11 not be of a rank less than a Sergeant of Police who shall 
be responsible for the day to day activities of the Task Force and shall have responsibility to ensure 
that the Unit is properly trained and outfitted with the necessary resources . 
.. . . . ./2 



10112 
(ii) OPERATION 
(a) Where any member of the Task Force receives information of any illegal activity, it shall be his/her 
duty to report such information immediately to the Unit commander who shall determine the viability 
of the information. Where it becomes necessary to act upon such information, the Unit commander 
shall inform the First Division Officer to whom the Task Force reports. 
(b) It shall be the duty of the First Division Officer i/c of the Task Force to ensure that all personnel of the 
Unit are properly briefed prior to proceeding on any operation. It shall also be his responsibility to 
ensure that the officers are outfitted with the appropriate items ofkit inclusive of body armor, firearms 
and any other equipment that he may deem necessary before proceeding. 
(c) The First Division Officer shall ensure that all exercises/operations are documented in a chronological 
manner and form part of a Task Force Operational Order . The Order shall address the following: 
:.!. The Mission- what is the purpose of the operation. 
:!. The Objective- what is to be achieved. 
:J.;. Threat and Risk Assessment-
• The FDO or his designate, prior to the start of any operation shall inform the Unit commander 
of all threats/dangers involved in the operation based on the level of sensitivity of the 
environment and information received. 
• Where the level of threat is high, all precautionary measures must be taken to avoid or lessen 
such threat. 
• No exercise/operation shall be conducted before a proper threat assessment is made and the 
appropriate action taken to deal with such threat. 
• Each operation shall contain not less than five (5) persons, one of whom must be trained in 
Emergency Survival Techniques. 
• All jungle operations must be accompanied by officers of the OCNFB and comprised of Air 
Support, Crime Scene Investigators (CSis) , Canine and the assistance of any agency (law 
enforcement/non law enforcement) with the requisite expertise based on the information 
obtained. 
Method 
Regardless of the scope of the operation or information received, all necessary protocols must be 
strictly adhered to in order to prevent loss of life or serious injury to persons on the operation . 
. . . . . . ./3 



101/3 
ln the case of eradication exercises the following protocols shall be observed. 
• The Senior Superintendent of the OCNFB must first be informed . 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
As far as practicable , Air Support must be sought . 
A briefing and debriefing exercise must be conducted 
All personnel on the operation must be adequately outfitted with the appropriate items of kit 
including firearms, body amour and Global Positioning Systems (GPS) along with first aid 
equipment. 
Where marijuana trees are uprooted they must be completely destroyed . 
All persons arrested must be processed using normal operating standards 
All communication with Media must be done through the Public Affairs Unit. 
Communication 
All field communications shall be made through an assigned , safe and secure frequency and shall be 
arranged prior to the commencement of the operation . Persons who are not required to communicate 
shall observe radio silence to allow other persons uninterrupted access to the frequency . All courtesies 
must be extended to persons operating on such frequencies . 
Use of Force 
No more force shall be used than is reasonably necessary to carry out the eradication operation. Under 
such circumstances , the force used shall be proportionate to the existing threat or situation. 
Logistics 
The FDO i/c operations shall appoint a logistic officer for each operation who shall be respons ible for 
ensuring that there is an adequate supply of water , meals and all equipment necessary for the 
operation . It shall be the duty of the logistic officer to ensure all vehicles are fuelled and all radios and 
other equipment supplied are in proper working condition. 
Post Operat ion 
Upon the completion of each operation/exercise , a proper debriefing exercise must be conducted . A 
comprehensive report must be completed and forwarded to the Deputy Commissioner , Crime & 
Support through the Divisional Head . 
The FDO i/c operations shall be responsible for any follow-up action/investigation which may be 
necessary based on the outcome of the operation . 



101/4 
(iv) TRAINING 
The FDO i/c operation shall ensure that each Task Force member is adequately trained in the use of 
the firearms on issue to the Task Force. He shall also ensure that members of the Unit receive training 
in First Aid, Crime Scene Preservation, First Responders and Evacuation Procedures. 
All members of each Task Force must be certified on a yearly basis in the use of firearms to ensure 
that their skills are up to date. 
Genera l 
While these guidelines are not exhaustive they are intended to provide a framework whereby members of the 
Police Service, especially those involved in crime suppression and other high impact situations such as Task 
Forces and other like Units, are provided with written guidance with regards to the safety and security of 
personnel involved in such operations; Units would also be able to perform in a professional, efficient and 
effective manner and so avoid any negative repercussions which can affect the image of the Police Service 
or result in legal implications. 
Divisional and Unit commanders are therefore implored to ensure that all necessary steps are taken to fully 
comply with directives contained herein. 
Part III - NIL 
~~ 
Commissioner ofPolice 