No. 104 
Police Orders by 
Commissioner ofPolice 
Police Administration Building 
Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets 
Port of Spain 
Monday 21
51 
June 2010 
p n1s is an official document entrusted to members and civilian 
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press) 
Departmental Order PART 1- NIL 
PART IT 
Departmental Order No.8 dated 07.01.2010, is hereby Amended 
Introduction 
The effective reduction and detection of crime in Trinidad and Tobago (T&T) continues 
to pose a challenge for the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service. In 2009, crime and 
criminality reached unprecedented proportions in the country with a murder count of 506 
or murder rate of thirty-nine (39) percent per 100,000 persons, the second highest in the 
Caribbean Community (CARICOM) The situation prompted a national outcry and the 
TTPS is being called upon to account in every quarter. 
In a continuous effort to ensure the effective control of crime in T &T, the Computer or 
Comparative Crime Control Model (Comp Stat) was implemented with effect from 
January 2009. It is intended that the Comp Stat Model shall be adopted in all Police 
Divisions . The basic aim of the Comp Stat Model is to provide detailed intelligence to 
Divisional and Operational Commanders on a continued basis so that they can determine 
and implement appropriate crime fighting strategies. The Commanders are empow ered 
to initiate their chosen policy, however in return for this flexibility, they shall be held 
accountable to the Commissioner of Police for the success or failure of such strategies. 
Comp Stat is an operational management process in which effective leadership is the 
key to success. 
The Crime and Problem Analysis Branch (CAP A) is mandated to provide statistical data 
and analysis to ensure that the crime control strategies adopted and implemented are 
precisely targeted and focused. CAP A Branch shall also be responsible for training and 
sensitizing officers in the various divisions regarding the implementation of the Comp 
Stat Crime Control Model. 
The effectiveness and efficiency of the Comp Stat is, however, dependent upon the 
accuracy and timeliness of the General Occurrence Incident Report Forms (GOIR) 
entered into the VERSADEX Records Management System (Police Computer Database) 
by the Data Entry Operators. Therefore the Second Division Officer in charge of each 
station shall ensure that the relevant GOIR Forms are entered into the Police Computer 
Database as soon as practicable after the event occurs . 
.. ./2 



104/2 
The major part of the model encompasses Comp Stat (Computer or Comparative 
Statistics) Meetings which shall be held weekly, monthly and quarterly. The main 
purpose of the meetings would be to undertake a review of crime data provided by 
C.A.P.A Branch for a specified period and to ascertain the effectiveness of measures 
which were implemented to address the crime concerns. 
Police Commanders at meetings shall: 
• report on crime patterns and cross jurisdictional trends observed during 
the intervening period~ 
• assess/evaluate the effect1veness of anti-crime measures implemented 
• ascertain whether there are new crime trends developing and implement 
measures to counteract the developing trends; 
• brainstorm and plan strategies . 
Basic Principles 
The Comp Stat Crime Control Model will be built on four (4) basic principles: 
• Timely and accurate intelligence 
• Effective strategies and tactics 
• Rapid deployment of resources 
• Rigorous follow up and assessment 
Timely and Accurate Intelligence 
Timely and accurate intelligence is at the heart of the crime control model. Each station 
shall focus on the mapping of crime and submission of the G.O.I.R Forms in compliance 
with existing Departmental Orders. The process of mapping will assist in the 
identification of problem areas or hotspots and allows for the identification of developing 
crime patterns within station districts. 
The C.A.P.A Branch shall ensure that Divisional and Operational Commanders, stations, 
have access to anaylitical data to drive their strategies and tactics in addressing crime 
problems. 
Effective Strategies and Tactics 
Where hot spots and crime patterns are identified, Divisional and Operational 
Commanders shall develop and implement effective strategies and tactics to bring about 
permanent solutions to the crime problems. 
The strategies and tactics must be developed through meetings with staff to obtain their 
contributions for the development of workable solutions. Each station shall implement 
problem oriented policing approaches to address the crime problems. 
Briefing and debriefings sessions must be held daily with the shifts at station to support 
the crime control model. 
.. ./3 



104/3 
Rapid Deployment of Resources 
Operational and Divisional Commanders shall ensure that available resources are 
deployed promptly to execute the strategies and tactics developed to deal with a crime 
problem. The rapid deployment of resources creates a positive impression to the public 
that the Police Service is effective and is on top of the crime problem. 
It also allows the station command team the opportunity to recognize very early whether 
the strategies and tactics that they have employed are effective and if necessary, make 
timely adjustments to them for maximum effect. 
Rigorous Follow Up and Assessment 
Rigorous follow up and assessment are essential to the model to ensure that the desired 
outcomes are achieved. It is critical to the continued success of the model that assessment 
and evaluation of strategies and tactics become commonplace in the TTPS. 
Operational and Divisional commanders shall: 
• Maintain clear and detailed records of the strategies and tactics that were 
successful or unsuccessful 
• Evaluate overall crime trends over a montWy, quarterly and annual basis 
• Accumulate demographic and other data that can provide additional information 
for understanding why certain problems exist or are not being resolved by the 
strategies and tactics deployed. 
Specific Objectives 
The Executive of the Police Service has identified the undermentioned as the crime­
specific objectives for 2010: 
• Reduce the incidence of Breaking Offences 
• Seizure of illegal firearms 
• Dismantle gangs and drug blocks 
• Reduce violent crimes including murders 
• Reduce tbe incidence of Domestic Violence and Child Abuse 
• Reduce tbe incidence of Larceny Motor vehicles 
.. ./4 



104/4 
Procedure for Comp Stat Meetings 
The Comp Stat Crime Control meeting shall last for a minimum of 90 minutes and focus 
on determining strategies to detect and or reduce identified crime problems in Divisions. 
The weekly or fortnightly Comp Stat meetings shall be convened by the Divisional 
Commanders (Senior Superintendents) and held in the respective Police Divisions. 
The monthly meeting shall be convened by the Assistant Commissioner responsible for 
the area. Quarterly meetings shall be convened by the Commissioner of Police or his 
representative at the Police Administrative Buildings, at San Fernando or Port-of Spain. 
The weekly or fortnightly meeting must be attended by the undermentioned : 
• Superintendents 
• Assistant Superintendents of Police 
• Station Commanders 
• Unit Commanders e.g. Heads of Task Force, Criminal Investigations 
Department , Crime Suppression Unit, Criminal Intelligence Unit, Special 
Branch, Organized Crime Narcotics and Firearms Bureau etc. 
The Divisional Commander shall chair the meeting and is responsible for the convening 
of the meeting, issuing invitations, preparation of the meeting venue, the recording and 
subsequent circulation of minutes of the meeting. 
Commanders of Divisions, Sections and Branches and Civilian Managers within the 
Police Service shall attend monthly and quarterly meetings. The Police Divisions shall 
be grouped into two (2) regions for the quarterly CompStat Meetings . 
Region One 
This is the South region, which shall comprise of Southern, Central and South Western 
Divisions. 
Region Two 
This is the North region, comprise of Tobago , Eastern, Port-of-Spain, Western, Northern 
and North Eastern Divisions . 
Full details of the Comp Stat Crime Control Model can be obtained on the Police 
Information Portal (computer) , from Divisional Commanders or the C.A.P.A Branch 