Police Orders by Mr James Philbert 
Commissioner of Police (Ag) 
Police Administration Building 
Cor. Edward & Sack'Ville Streets 
Port of Spain 
Tuesday 8th September 2009 
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian 
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press) 
No. 150 Departmental Order PART I-NIL 
CESSATION OF SALARY DEDUCTIONS TO FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 
INFORMATION 
It has become a common practice for Police Officers to approach their pay-sheet clerks at the 
Police Finance Branch and make demands for cessation of salary deductions to Financial 
Institutions to which they may be indebted , without any formal application being addressed to 
the Senior Superintendent 'Finance Branch ' 
While due recognition is given to the fact that Police Officers, like all citizens of Trinidad and 
Tobago , have the Constitutional right to enjoyment of property , it must also be borne in mind 
that they have an equal responsibility to honour their obligation whenever debts are incurred . 
Regulation 144 of the Police Service Regulations 2007 provides the regulatory framework with 
which Police Officers are required to adhere whenever indebtedness is incurred. In this regard, 
all Police Officers must conform with this regulation in order to avoid any blemish to their own 
credibility or to the image and reputation of the Police Service . 
INTENTION 
This order is intended to establish a specific procedure through which Police Officers may 
discontinue salary deductions to a Financial Institution. 
INTERPRETATION 
In this Departmental Order-
"Financial Institution" means any Commercial Bank, Credit Union, Mortgage Finance 
Company , Private Lending Agency , or any other institution that engages in the business of 
financial lending . 
0 • ./2 



150/2 
METHODOLOGY 
Police Officers shall immediately cease the practice of approaching their pay-sheet clerks and 
demanding cessation of salary deductions . 
Any Police Officer desirous of having a salary deduction to a Financial Institution ceased shall: 
(a) Apply in writing to the Senior Superintendent Finance Branch ; and 
(b) Append to the application, a Jetter of authorisation from the respective Financial 
Institution . 
COMMUNICATION 
Heads of Divisions/Sections/Branches/Units are to ensure that the contents of this Order 
and the provisions of Regulation 144 of the Police Service Regulations 2007 are 
communicated to all personnel under their command . 
AUTHORITY 
Regulation 193 (I) (b) of the Police Service Regulations 2007. 
PART III- NIL 