Police Orders by Dr. Dwayne Gibbs 
Commissioner of Police 
Police Administration Building 
Corner Edward & Sackville Streets 
Port -of-Spain 
Monday 2"d July, 2012 
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian 
Employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press) 
1 
No. 104 Departmental Order PART I -NIL 
PART -ll 
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO POLICE SERVICE 
STANDING ORDERS 58 
DNA RECOVERY PROCEDURE 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
1. Interpretation 
2. Responsibilities of the Head ofDivision 
3. Duties of the Certified Officer 
4. Duties of the SOO in charge of Station/Charge Room 
5. Duties of the Investigating Officer 
6. Procedure for Obtaining Non-Intimate DNA Sample 
1. Interpretation 
In this order the term DNA is given the same meaning as stated in the Administration of Justice 
(Deoxyribonucleic Acid) Act, 2012; 
The word Detainee refers to "a person who is lawfully held in custody,; 
The term Non-Intimate Sample refers to a specimen of: 
a. Blood obtained by a prick of the finger 
b. Epithelial cells obtained by means of a buccal swab 
c. Plucked hair 
d. Saliva; 
..... ./2 



2 
104/2 
The term Intimate Sample refers to a specimen of biological or other material taken from 
a. any part of a person's genitals ; or 
b. a person 's bodily orifice other than the mouth; 
The word Suspect refers to a person whom the police have reasonable grounds for believing 
a. is about to commit an offence ; or 
b. may have committed an offence and who is being investigated by the police in relation to 
that offence; 
The word Accused refers to a person who is charged with an offence ; 
The term Crime Scene includes : 
a. Any place where an offence is committed , 
b. Anything found on or any foreign object found within the body or any part of the body of 
the victim, 
c. Anything worn or carried by the victim at the time when an offence was committed , 
d. Anything found on or any foreign object found within the body or any part of the body of 
a suspect, 
e. Anything found at any place associated with the commission of an offence ; or 
f Any location where evidence may be derived in relation to an offence; 
For the purposes of this Order, Child refers to a person under the age of eighteen (18) years; 
An Incapable Person refers to a person, who by reason of his physical or mental condition is 
unable to, 
a. Indicate whether he consents or does not consent, or 
b. Understand the implications of consenting or not consenting , to the giving of a non­
intimate or an intimate sample. 
A Qualified Person refers to a registered medical practitioner under the Medical Board Act, or a 
person registered under Part IT or ill of the Nurses or Midwives Registration Act, acting under 
the supervision of a registered Medical Practitioner . 
The term DNA Recovery Register refers to an official register that shall be kept at Stations for 
recording recovered DNA samples and shaJJ be kept in accordance with SO 52 Sections 2 and 4. 
The following entries shall be made in the DNA Recovery Register in a chronological order as 
per ' Appendix A'. 



3 
104/3 
The term DNA Recovery Request Book refers to an official register that shall be kept at all 
stations and the forms must be filled out in triplicate on the recovery of each DNA sample. One 
copy shall be kept by the investigator, one copy shall accompany the DNA sample to the 
Forensic Science Centre and the third copy shall be kept for station records (see appendix B). 
A Certified Officer refers to a police officer who is trained and certified by the competent 
authority to recover non-intimate DNA samples. 
The term Representative in relation to a child or incapable person has the same meaning as 
defined in the DNA Act (ACT No.5 of2012) 
2. Duties of the Head of Division 
Head of Divisions shall: 
a. Assign an area within a Station/Divisional Headquarters which shall be secure and sterile 
for the temporary storage of recovered DNA samples and shall include an exhibit 
refrigerator (s) for samples requiring cold storage and a cabinet(s) for exhibits requiring 
dry storage. These storage areas shall be maintained by means of control access. 
b. Ensure that each station is equipped with a lockable refrigerator and cabinet for the safe 
storage of DNA recovery samples prior to being taken to the temporary storage facility. 
c. Appoint a Certified Officer who shall be responsible for the collection of samples from 
the temporary storage facilities to the Forensic Science Centre. 
d. Ensure that adequate resources are made available to carry out these functions. 
e. Ensure that the DNA Recovery Register and the DNA Recovery Request Book are 
established and maintained in every station in each Division. 
f Ensure that a monthly return is submitted to the Deputy Commissioner in charge of 
Investigations of all ON A samples recovered for the month in question. 
g. Ensure that all DNA samples are collected by 10 am each day from the temporary storage 
facilities and transported to the Forensic Science Centre without delay. 
h. Establish a database of all DNA samples recovered in the Division as per the DNA 
Recovery Register . 
3. Duties of the SDO in charge of Station/Charge Room 
a. SDO' s i/c shall ensure that the DNA Recovery Register and the DNA Recovery Request 
Book are checked and initialled by 10 a.m. on a daily basis 
b. Ensure that the DNA Recovery Register is maintained in accordance with SO 52 Sect.(4). 



4 
104/4 
c. Ensure all relevant information is entered on the DNA request form. 
d. Ensure that all requests for DNA recovery is attended to without delay. 
e. Ensure that all DNA recovered samples are taken to the temporary storage facility 
without delay. 
f Ensure that the lockable refrigerator and cabinet are maintained in a safe and secure 
manner at all times and all DNA samples are safely secured therein . 
g. Ensure that a monthly return of all DNA samples recovered is submitted to the Head of 
the Division by the second day of each month. 
4. Duties of the Certified Officer 
The Certified Officer shall: 
a. Immediately upon request by the SDO i/c or any senior officer in charge of an 
investigation, proceed to recover a non-intimate DNA sample from the donor in 
accordance with approved standards . 
b. Identify himself/herself as a police officer to the donor. 
c. Explain the purpose and procedure for the DNA Recovery . 
d. Ensure that all entries are made in ink and initialled in the relevant forms and registers . 
e. Ensure that the DNA sample is properly sealed and secured in tamper -proof packaging 
and clearly labelled and signed in accordance with approved standards . 
f. Ensure that all intimate and/or non-intimate samples recovered by a qualified person are 
properly packaged and endorsed by both the qualified person and the certified officer. 
g. Immediately upon receipt of all recovered samples, hand over same to the SDO i/c for 
storage or submission to the Forensic Science Centre without delay. 
h. Ensure that the DNA sample of a child/incapable person is taken in accordance with 
section 20 of the DNA Act. 
5. Duties of the Investigating Officer 
The investigating officer shall: 
a. Request from the SDO i/c the assistance of a Certified Officer for the recovery of a non­
intimate DNA sample (s). 
b. Furnish the SDO with all relevant information relative to the investigation. 
c. Where possible the Investigator shall ensure all the relevant information is entered on the 
DNA Recovery Request Form and DNA Recovery Register. 
..... ./5 



104/5 
d. Ensure that all DNA submissions in the respective matter(s) are submitted for analysis at 
the Forensic Science Centre. 
e. Ensure that all certificates of analysis and exhibits are collected in a timely manner. 
f. Ensure that the exhibits are retained for presentation in court. 
6. Procedure for Obtaining Non-Intimate DNA Samples 
The Certified Officer shall:-
a) Identify himself to the Donor 
b) Explain the purpose for which the sample is being taken 
c) Obtain consent from the Donor where necessary 
d) Ensure a sterile and secure area is acquired for the recovery of the DNA sample 
5 
e) Adorn appropriate Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) and with the use of the 
appropriate DNA kit obtain a DNA sample from the specified Donor 
f) Ensure the recovered sample is placed in a tamper proof evidence bag with the 
relevant markings and chain of custody is maintained. 
g) Complete forms 1, 2, 3 and 4 of the second schedule of the DNA Act where 
necessary. 
h) Maintain contemporaneous notes from the moment the request is made to the 
moment the DNA sample is submjtted to the SDO in charge of Station/Charge 
Room for temporary storage. 
PART III- NIL 
c20 
Commissioner ofPolice 



APPENDIX B 
DNA RECOVERY REQUEST FORM 
INVESTIGATOR'S (NAME/ RANK/ NO.) 
NAME OF PERSON TAKING REQUEST: (NAME/ RANK/ NO.) 
CERTIFIED OFFICER {NAME/ RANK/ NO.) 
DONOR'S NAME: 
DONOR'S ADDRESS: 
CONTACT NUMBER: 
CLASSIFIED 
DNA REC._OOl 
DATE ISSUED: 
PHONE NUMBER: UNIT/DIVISION: 
STATION: REQUEST DATE: (DD/MM/YY) 
DATE OF RECOVERY: {DD/MM/YY) PHONE NUMBER: 
DONOR INFORMAnON 
DONOR TYPE: 
VICTIM SUSPECT RELATIVE ( WITNESS/EUMINATION 
CONSENT 
I .................. ............................................... give consent for the taking of my/this DNA sample. 



Appendix A 
DNA RECOVERY REGISTER 
DONOR INFORMATION 
DATE OF LAST KNOWN CONTACT CERTIFIED 
I 
CASE I COURIER 
DATE I NO. DATE DONORS NAME ALIAS BIRTH GENDER ADDRESS NO. OFFICER INVESTIGATOR NAME/SIGNATURE REMARKS 
-- --- -- --