ae Police orders by
ya Commissioner of Police
ves Police Administration Building
eee Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
2 Proper pao SO Port of Spain
: ee Monday 30" December 2019
This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press.
aa
No 227 Departmental Order PART I - NIL
PART II
THE AMALGAMATION OF THE OPERATIONS PLANNING AND COORDINATING
SECRETARIAT (OPACS) AND CLOSE CIRCUIT TELEVISION CONTROL CENTER
(CCTV) TO ESTABLISH
THE TTPS OPERATIONS COMMAND CENTRE (TTPS OCC)
This Departmental Order No. 227 of 2019 rescinds Departmental Order No 13 of 2010 Re:
The establishment of the Close Circuit Television Control Center (CCTV), the temporary
establishment of the Operations Planning and Coordinating Secretariat (OPACS) since 2009
and any other Order/Directives/Instructions regarding administration and operation of the
aforementioned units and sections with immediate effect.
1) INFORMATION
In keeping with the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service (TTPS) 2019-2021 strategic vision, the
Commissioner of Police (COP) and his Executive have embarked upon a total transformation and
modernizing of the TTPS. This process involves but not limited to organizational restructure,
expansion of the TTPS Executive, re-engineering of the business processes of certain units and the
: realignment of various units/departments.
Pursuant to the above and coupled with the need to have a more effective accountability of the
resources of the TTPS in terms of police presence and subsequence response, it has become
necessary to re-aligned the units in order for effective coordinating, planning and monitoring of
operations and special events and critical incidents that is the responsibility of the Trinidad and
Tobago Police Service (TTPS).


--- page break ---

2) ESTABLISHMENT
The Commissioner of Police and his Executive management have taken a strategic and operational
decision to amalgamate the Operations Planning and Coordinating Secretariat (OPACS) and Close
Circuit Television Control Center (CCTV) to establish the TTPS Operations Command Center
(TTPS OCC) with effect October 1° 2019.
With the promulgation of this Departmental Order, OPACS and CCTV shall be realigned, with all
personnel and resources assigned to the respective units and sections be absorbed in to the TTPS
OCC. The TTPS Operations Command Center (TTPS OCC) will be located at Knowsley Building,
: # 1 Dundonald Street, Port of Spain, where it will carry out its mandate.
The amalgamation of the CCTV and OPACS to establish the TTPS Operations Command Center
(TTPS OCC) in the TTPS does not affect or prejudice any ongoing court proceedings or
investigations.
3) JUSTIFICATION
The establishing of the TTPS OCC which is intended to be the central point and driving force for
response will enhance the TTPS effectiveness and capability for increase presence, timely response
and efficient use of technology. The CCTV control center was established to monitor the roadways
within Trinidad and Tobago with a view of reducing criminal activities, enhancing detection of
offences and provide effective response to the public and OPACS was establish to plan, coordinate
and monitor the TTPS resources as it relates to all special events, critical incidents and disaster
response within Trinidad and Tobago.
However, both OPACS and CCTV utilize similar and common methods in its operations and in
many instances there is cross communications and ambiguity in directives. Hence, in this
circumstance the establishment of a single unit with the resources and administrative directives for
, command and control of the TTPS resources with responsibility for the coordinating, planning and
monitoring of operations, with in the TTPS would bring greater value, accountability and
efficiency of the TTPS’s resources in response to “Call for Service” by the general public, support
' r —" " EE ee sateeinies ae q


--- page break ---

in the investigation and prosecution of offenders, and assist in the planning and coordination in

cases of critical incidents, major/special events and other environmental security issues that require

special attention.

This amalgamation is consistent with the recommendations contained in the Cabinet Appointed

Police Manpower Audit Committee’s Report dated October 17, 2017 pages 33-47 and specifically,

the need to review the number of units & branches in the TTPS for more effective management of
officers and allocation of resources.

4) CLASSIFICATION

The TTPS Operations Command Center (TTPS OCC) is classified as a Class 1 Specialist Unit.

Personnel assigned/posted to the TTPS Operations Command Center (TTPS OCC) may be

required to undergo specialized training and development and would be continuously assessed in

the core competencies listed at paragraph 9 of this Departmental Order.

5) CORE MANDATE

The TTPS Operations Command Center (TTPS OCC) key focus is to monitor and coordinated the

effective use of the TTPS resources in response to “Call for Service” by the general public, support

in the investigation and prosecution of offenders, and assist in the planning and coordination of

the TTPS resources, in cases of critical incidents, major/special events and other environmental

security issues that require special attention.

The TTPS Operations Command Center (TTPS OCC) will carry out its mandate from an

intelligence-led perspective for its areas of responsibilities through established reporting protocols

by means of strategic assessment, data collection, analysis and disseminating information to all

internal and external stakeholder.

These mandates will be critical for the effective and efficient deployment of the TTPS resources

on a daily basis in the first instance, to the response “Call for Service” by the general public and


--- page break ---

.
secondly, in cases of critical incidents, major/special events and other environmental security
issues that require special attention.

5:1 Major/Special Event

A major/special event is defined as: “4 foreseeable event that should have at least one of the
following characteristics:

e Historical, political, economic, sporting and cultural significance or popularity

e Large media coverage and/or international media attendance

e Participation of citizens from different countries and/or possible target group

e Participation of VIP’s and/or dignitaries

e Large number of persons in attendance and poses the potential of threats and therefore

may require international cooperation and assistance.

5:2 Critical Incident
A critical incident refers to:
“Any event or situation that threatens critical infrastructure or the lives, business and property of
an individual and/or a community which requires immediate, quick and decisive action and which
necessitates the involvement of other components in response to the incident and occurring outside
of the normal course of routine activities. Such incidents include man-made and natural disasters
and occurrences such as (but are not limited to), floods, storms, tornadoes, volcanic eruptions,
hurricanes, earthquake, tsunamis, domestic and international terrorist activities, workplace
violence, riots, industrial action, states of emergency, coup d’états, curfews,
chemical/biological/radiological/ explosive or nuclear use resulting in or could possibly result in
a catastrophic outcome.
6) MAIN FUNCTIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
The TTPS Operations Command Center (TTPS OCC) will be the focal point within the TTPS
mandated for the monitoring and coordinating of the TTPS resources on a daily basis while,
conducting general public safety and security functions and in specialized circumstances for the
such as major/special events, critical incidents and other environmental security issues. However,


--- page break ---

EI
the TTPS Operations Command Center (TTPS OCC) shall have oversight _and_ exercise
supervisory jurisdiction in relation to the response of the TTPS resources to the general public
for “Call for Service” critical incidents, major/special events and disasters. Thus, the core functions
of the TTPS Operations Command Center (TTPS OCC) are but, not limited to the undermentioned
activities:-

: a. Operations /Monitoring

i. Monitor the activities of the TTPS personnel and vehicles while on patrols and or
operations on a daily basis throughout the Divisions via GPS, CCTV cameras or
wireless communication (as is necessary).

ii. Monitor the TTPS response to “Call for Service” by the general public

iii. | Monitor the general public via CCTV cameras while on the public roadways to ensure
adherence to the laws and public safety and security on the said roadways.

iv. Monitoring and assessing risks that have been reported by the general public via the
TTPS App and disseminating to the relevant internal authority to be actioned (when
applicable)

v. | Provide information on the status of daily patrols, operations, special events, critical
incidents and disaster relates incidents in a timely manner or as required by the TTPS
executive.

vi. | Provide information to commanders and personnel on patrols as to the status of the
ongoing activities and incidents.

vii. | Monitoring and assessing risks of all critical incidents, special events and critical
infrastructure sites and report its findings to competent authority.

viii. | Initiate response both internal and external to relevant authorities while maintaining
communication and monitoring of operations, major/special events, critical incidents
and disaster relates incidents.


--- page break ---

b. Intelligence Gathering
i.  Collating, analyzing and disseminating of all data as it relates to reports of serious
crimes, road traffic accidents and the deployment of the TTPS resources (patrols)
ii. Gathering, analyzing and the dissemination of all spatial (GPS mapping) data and
CCTV data as it relates to critical incidents, major/special events and critical
: infrastructure.

iii. | Engaging with TTPS App users for collecting, analyzing and the dissemination of
information received to the relevant authority within the TTPS or cause immediate
action to be taken.

iv. Gather evidence via CCTV cameras as in support of the investigation and
prosecution as requested by investigators, preparing and packaging evidence for
court purposes.

v. Conduct active monitoring of CCTV cameras in order to update on traffic
conditions, incidents or identify criminal activities.

c. Planning and Coordinating

i. Assist both internally and externally with planning and coordination of TTPS
resources in cases of critical incidents, major/special events, disasters and other
environmental security issues that require special attention

ii. Liaising and networking with all relevant external and external agencies involved
in the management, planning and coordination of critical incidents, major/special
events and disasters.

iii. | Developing and establishing action plans (Public Safety and Security Operational
Plans) for critical incidents, disasters and major/special events.

iv. Coordinating and facilitating of briefing with all stakeholders for the implementing
of action plans (Public Safety and Security Operational Plans) in the event of
critical incidents, disasters and major/special events.

v. Coordinating and facilitating of debriefing with all stakeholders for the review of After
Action Plans (AAR) after critical incidents, disasters and major/special events.


--- page break ---

d. Administrative Support and Data Entry
i. Gather, prepare and facilitate viewing for requests of information from the general
public under the Freedom of Information Act via the TTPS Legal Unit in relation
to CCTV camera footage as requested.
| ii. Function as Liaison Officers to engage external and internal stakeholders for pro-
: active strategic planning of Public Safety and Security as it relates to critical
incidents, disasters and major/special events.
iii. | Developing performance indicators for the TTPS Operations Command Center
(TTPS OCC) in response to all major/special events, disasters and critical incidents
and thereafter take the necessary remedial action.
iv. Develop, implement and review SOP’s for the TTPS Operations Command Center
(TTPS OCC) and all other command centers within the TTPS, ensuring that they
are in keeping with the standards set by the TTPS and international best practices.
v. Developing and maintaining a database of all critical incidents, major/special
events, disasters and critical infrastructure information.
e. Any other function or responsibility to achieve the core mandate of the TTPS Operations
Command Center (TTPS OCC) or any function /responsibility/ special assignment
authorized by the Commissioner of Police.
7) EXTERNAL PARTNERS
TTPS Operations Command Center external partners includes but is not limited to the
undermentioned:-
" Ministry of National Security
" Ministry of Local Government ( Municipal Police / Disaster Management Unit)
# Ministry of Health (MOH)
" Ministry of Sport and Youth Affairs
" Ministry of Works &Transport (MOWT)
" Ministry of Community Development, Culture and the Arts
« National Operations Fusion Center ( NOFC)


--- page break ---

I OOEEEE

« Trinidad and Tobago Defence Force ( TTDF)
« Trinidad and Tobago Fire Service (TTFS)
" Office of Disaster Preparedness and Management ( ODPM)

8) ADMINISTRATION

The Commissioner of Police (COP) have overall responsibility for the TTPS Operations

Command Center (TTPS OCC). The Head of the TTPS Operations Command Center (TTPS

OCC) shall report the Commissioner of Police or through an officer authorized by him. Based on

the new organizational structure the TTPS Operations Command Center (TTPS OCC) shall be

under the executive supervision of the Assistant Commissioner of Police Central Intelligence

Bureau.

The TTPS Operations Command Center (TTPS OCC) shall be headed by an officer of the rank

of Inspector of Police and shall have a sanctioned strength, made up of the undermentioned

ranks:-

Inspector of | Sergeant of | Corporal of Police Total _
"re [rome | me | omme |
ne es
However, the TTPS Operations Command Center (TTPS OCC) may include other officers and
support staff/personnel (civilian employees) pending authorization from the Commissioner of
Police.

9) CORE COMPETENCIES

The core competencies to perform the functions of the TTPS Operations Command Center (TTPS
OCC) shall include but, are not limited to the following: integrity, managing performance,
leadership, employee relations, teamwork, achieving results, organizational awareness,
networking, customer service, problem solving and effective communication.


--- page break ---

10) GENERAL

This Departmental Order provides a frame work for the establishment and operations of the TTPS
Operations Command Center (TTPS OCC). However, the Commissioner of Police may amend
this Departmental Order or enact additional Orders/ or issue further Directives to achieve the core
mandate and enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of the TTPS Operations Command Center
(TTPS OCC).

11) AUTHORITY
This Departmental Order is enacted pursuant to Section 193 (1) (b) of the Police Service
Regulations 2007.

PART TI-NIL
=
Commissioner of Police
Page 9|9
