Police Orders by 
Commissioner ofPolice 
Police Administration Building 
Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets 
Port of Spain 
Tuesday 20th November, 2007 
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian 
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press) 
No. 202 Departmental Order PART I - NIL 
PARTll 
PACKAGING AND HANDLING OF FIREARM EVIDENCE ON RECOVERY 
1. INFORMATION: 
The Trinidad and Tobago Police Service in an effort to enhance its general efficiency and 
effectivene ss in the investigation of Serious Crimes involving the use of firearms and 
ammunition has embarked on the implementation of proper procedures in the recovery, handling , 
packaging and submission of frrearms and ammunition in an attempt to ensure all evidence 
available by scientific means is obtained. The recovery of all firearms and ammunition must be 
understood beyond mere charges for possession of these articles and thus, the role of the 
Specialist Evidence Recovery Unit (S.E.RU) of The Special Anti Crime Unit of Trinidad and 
Tobago (S.A.U.T.T) and other agencies will greatly assist this venture. 
2. INTENTION : 
This order is intended to provide information and instructions to be followed. 
3. INITIAL HANDLING : 
On discovery of a firearm in secure circumstances the firearm will be left in position until a 
trained TTPS Crime Scene Examiner (CSI) is present. If in, a non secure environment the 
weapon will be handled by the officer wearing two pairs of sterile gloves, and placing the 
firearm into a sterile bag or firearm exhibit box (followed by a 'Kevlar' firearms bag if available) 
and moved to a safe environment for a complete forensic handling process to take place. 
3.1 A C.S.I will wear a mask, two pairs of surgical gloves and a protective suit. The firearm will be 
photographed in situ regardless of the incident situation. This photograph will be used for court 
purposes when required, to replace the current non-statutory procedure by the judiciary to 
'obs erve ' the weapon when charging of suspects is undertaken . 
3.2 A visual examination will be conducted to identify the safety situation of the weapon, before 
handling takes place. Using sterile gloves the weapon can be handled to a minimum to avoid 
destroying any finger marks. Each firearm and its ammunition will be packaged separately . 
4. Unloading 
4.1 All handling process will take place on top of sterile packaging (this being preserved on 
conclusion). 
. . ./2 



202/2 
4.2 On making safe the firearm. A note will be made of the 'state of fire' of the weapon. 
• Is the Safety catch on or off? 
• Where the rounds are positioned , and in what chamber (revolver) they are found. 
• Whether a cartridge is present in the firing chamber 
• Whether cartridges are present in the magazine . 
4.3 If a cartridge is recovered from the chamber it should be preserved separately from any magazine 
located cartridges that are recovered. 
4.4 Cartridges will be placed is sterile containers (preferably plastic rather than a paper or plastic 
bag, where contact may be made with surface and cause damage to fingerprints) . 
4.5 The firearm will be packaged (in this order of suitability) in a sterile firearm exhibit box or (2) in 
a sterile large plastic bag or (3) a large paper sack. The firearm(s) packaging will be marked 
with a purpose made label, certifying the firearm has been rendered safe to handle . This 
certificate will have the submitting officer ' s signature and details on it. 
5. Firearm Examination: 
5.1 The firearm will be taken as early as possible to the SAUTT Specialist Evidence Recovery Unit 
(S.E .R.U) at Cumuto . An appointment must be made prior to attending Cumuto. All staff 
responsible for the handling and examination of the exhibits will be T.T.P .S. or S.RP Officers. 
5.2 If the safety procedures have not been carried out as described above then the firearm will not be 
accepted into the S.E.RU, until these procedures have been adhered to. 
5.3 A visual examination will be made using light sources to identify and recover any extraneous 
particulate. 
5.4 The trigger , safety catch and rough gnarled surfaces will be swabbed for D.N.A. The barrel area 
will be examined and swabbed if necessary for victim blood trace . 
5. 5 The firearm will be examined using light sources and chemical processes for finger marks . 
These positive results should be photographed . 
5.6 Consideration should be given to swabbing ridge detail for traces ofDNA. The recovered finger 
marks and DNA should be submitted to the relative laboratory or bureau . 
5.7 The firearm will be marked, as having been examined by the S.E.RU and arrangements will be 
made for the exhibit to be transported to the Forensic Science Centre for ffilS examination. 
6. Bullet Fragment Recovery 
6.1 All recovered fragments will be submitted to the firearm unit of the Forensic Science Centre . 
These are not suitable for DNA recovery . 
. . ./3 



202/3 
7. Cartridge Case Recovery and Examination 
7.1 The items will be recovered and preserved separately in plastic/glass containers. Plastic 
bags/paper bags will only be used in an emergency (due to the contact of the packaging on the 
cartridge, possibly damaging fingerprint recovery) . 
7.2 Any cartridge above 9mm in size will be examined for fingerprints at the SAUTT S.E.RU and 
then consideration will be given to swabbing for DNA 
7.3 Discharged cartridge cases will not be suitable for DNA due to high temperatures 
Achieved during discharge. 
7.4 Cartridges below 9mm will not be suitable for fingerprint examination . 
7.5 Discharged cartridge cases will be unsuitable for DNA recovery. 
7.6 All cartridge cases will be submitted to the Forensic Science Centre as soon as possible. 
8. Magazines 
8.1 Magazines can be unloaded at the S.E.R U to identify the number of cartridges present. The 
magazines will be examined for particulate contamination, fingerprints and DNA Cartridges 
may be packaged together . 
8.2 Examination will take place at the S.E.RU prior to submission to the Forensic Science Centre. 
9. Possible Sample Recovery 
9.1 Consideration should be given to recover DNA, finger marks, fibres, blood, explosive trace, 
firearms residue, drug traces or any other sample where relevant to the enquiry. 
I 0. Prese ntations of Firearms at Court 
1 0. 1 There is no legal requirement concerning the presentation of a firearm, its component parts or 
ammunition to the Courts for a defendant's first hearing. 
10.2 The practice of presenting a firearm, its component parts or ammunition at first hearings will 
cease. Instead, when such evidence is needed, specifically requested photographs as describ ed in 
the initial handling process, would be made available. 
GENERAL 
There must be strict compliance with this order as it will not only improve our crime fighting 
capacity but also should initiate a grater prosecution ability and ultimately see a reduction in 
crime in general. 
PART III - ~ 