Police Orders by Mr. James Philbert 
Commissioner of Police (Ag) 
Police Administration Building 
Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets 
Port of Spain 
Tuesday 24th November, 2009. 
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian 
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press) 
Departmental Order 
PART II 
VISITING POLICE FORCES ACT 2007 
RE.-CBOGM 
1. INFORMATION 
The Republic of Trinidad and Tobago will host the Commonwealth Heads of 
Government Meeting (CHOGM) November 27
1
h - 29th 2009. The CHOGM will bring 
together fifty three (53) Heads of State and Governments from around the world. In 
addition to the Heads of State and Governments attending the Meeting , will be their 
delegation, press and media personnel. The Trinidad and Tobago Police Service, with 
assistance from other agencies of the Ministry of National Security, is tasked with the 
role and responsibility for all security arrangements for the CHOGM. The magnitude of 
the policing operation is focused on the National and International threat level towards 
potential targets in order to reduce vulnerability . To buttress this undertaking , Police 
Officers from other CARICOM states will be performing duties with the Trinidad and 
Tobago Police Service. It is in this regard, the Visiting Police Forces Act 2007, was 
enacted to provide for the presence, activities, privileges and immunities of members of 
Visiting Police Forces and civilian personnel and for related matters. 
2. INTENTION 
The intention ofthis order is to inform that visiting Police Officers performing duties for 
the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting enjoy the same rights, privileges and 
immunities as local police officers 
.. ./2 



201/2 
3. ADMINISTRATION 
The Visiting Police Forces Act No 9 of 2007 (the Act) was enacted to provide for the 
presence, activities, privileges and immunities of members of visiting police forces and 
civilian personnel of designated States who are present in Trinidad and Tobago pursuant 
to the provisions of the Treaty of Chaguaramas on Security Assistance. "Visiting Police 
Force" means the member of any Police Force of a designated State present in Trinidad 
and Tobago on official duties. 
Section 5 of the Act provides inter alia" ... a member of a visiting police force who is 
sent to Trinidad and Tobago for the performance of police duties shall, while on duty in 
Trinidad and Tobago be deemed to be a police officer for the purposes of this Act and 
shall have the same rights, powers and privileges as are conferred on members of the 
Trinidad and Tobago Police Service by the Police Service Act or any other law. 
Additionally, all Police Officers are required to extend the usual courtesies to senior 
officers of Visiting Police Forces as would usually be paid to officers of similar rank in 
the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service". 
4. COMMUNICATION 
Heads of Divisions, Sections and Branches are mandated to apprise all members of staff 
under their supervision, the information contained herein. 
5. AUTHORITY 
Section 193 (1) ofthe Police Service Regulations 2007. 