No. 224 
Police Orders by Dr. Dwayne Gibbs 
Commissioner of Police 
Police Administration Building 
Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets 
Port of Spain 
Monday 15lhNovembcr2010 
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian 
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press) 
Departmental Order PART 1- NIL 
PART II 
Departmental Order No. 180 Dated 22.10.2009 is hereby rescinded. 
POLICY DOCUMENT ON SPECIALIST SECTIONS 
1.0 POLICY STATEMENT 
In keeping with our mission statement, the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service continues to be 
committed to providing a safe, secure and stable environment by providing professional and 
efficient policing services to the national community. 
2.0 POLICY RATIONALE 
The rationale for this document is based on an analysis of police officers' performance at 
promotion examinations and assessment interviews which revealed the following: 
• Many officers lacked the ability to demonstrate keen knowledge and understanding of 
core policing functions, duties and responsibilities . 
• Some of the officers assigned/posted to specialist sections do not possess the requisite 
competencies and the right attitude to ensure that he/she performs competently and 
professionally within those sections. 
• That the organisation must bridge the gap between the training needs of all officers and 
improved operational effectiveness, by identifying and enhancing the competencies 
required to function effectively within any specialist sections . 
... 12 



224/2 
3.0 OBJECTIVES 
The TTPS is steadfast in its resolve that our most valuable asset~ our human resources are 
trained and developed to meet and combat the numerous challenges being encountered in our 
fight against crime. In this regard, the organisation will: 
• Ensure that all officers assigned to specialist sections possess the required 
competencies, has demonstrated integrity, honesty, professionalism, the right 
attitude and the wiHingness to meet and/or exceed set performance targets. 
• Ensure that aJI officers undergo induction courses that are relevant to the 
specialist sections they are assigned/posted to. 
• Ensure that officers already assigned to specialist sections will be kept abreast of 
the core functions and responsibilities of policing by undergoing refresher 
courses before being transferred to a line division. 
• To ensure that officers are thoroughly assessed prior to being assigned to a 
Specialist Section. 
4.0 APPLICATION AND SCOPE 
All members of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service must be au courant with, and are 
required to comply with the measures outlined in this document. 
5.0 SPECJ.ALIST SECTIONS CLASSIFICATION 
Specialised preventative and detective groups exist within the TTPS and are therefore 
generalised under three categories of classification. These classifications are based upon the 
functions being carried out by those sections and the required knowledge, skills, experience and 
attitude an officer is required to possess to bring value to those sections, and by extension, the 
Trinidad and Tobago Police Service. In this regard, training and development for officers 
assigned/posted to these sections shall focus on changing or improving the knowledge, skills 
and attitudes of individuals and hence, training shall involve providing these officers with the 
competencies needed to perform effectively and efficiently in those sections. Conversely, the 
development of officers will have a long-range focus to prepare officers for future policing 
responsibilities, while simultaneously, increasing their capacity to perform their current 
functions. 



224/3 
5.1 Class One Specialist Sections 
Officers assigned/posted to this section are required to cany out sensitive and classified 
functions, including high profile or confidential investigations which may involve regular 
intimate interaction with dignitaries/officials. As such, officers assigned/posted to these sections 
are required to undergo specialised training and be thoroughly assessed on their aptitude and 
personality/behavioural traits. This class shall comprise of: 
• Anti-Corruption Investigative Bureau 
• Complaints Division 
• Criminal Intelligence Unit 
• Criminal Investigation Department/Criminal Records Office 
• Crime and Problem Analysis Unit 
• Fraud Squad 
• Homicide Bureau oflnvestigations 
• Special Branch 
• Special anti-Crime Unit 
• Organised Crime Narcotic and Firearm Bureau 
• CyberUnit 
5.2 Class Two SpeciaJist Section 
Class two specialist sections by their very nature involve investigative/operational functions. This 
group consists of specially-selected and trained quasi-military officers. Officers assigned/posted 
to these sections therefore are at the forefront of the organisation's crime fighting initiatives and 
also perform specialised support functions. It is imperative that officers assigned/posted to these 
sections undergo specialised training, and thoroughly assessed for fitness, aptitude and behaviour. 
This class of Specialist Section shall include: 
• Divisional Criminal Investigation Departments 
• Divisional Task Forces 
• E999 Rapid Response Branch 
• Inter Agency Task Force 
• Mounted and Canine Branch 
• Traffic Branch (Motor Cyclists) 
• Police Academy 
.. ./4 



224/4 
5.3 Class Three Specialist 
Class three shall consist of those sections which carry out general administrative/support functions. 
Officers assigned/posted to these sections may not necessarily require intense specialist training; 
however, appropriate assessments of aptitude and core policing functions and responsibilities must 
be undertaken. This class of Specialist Section shall include: 
• Audio Visual Unit 
• Court and Process Branch 
• Divisional Offices 
• Finance Branch 
• Human Resource Branch 
• Information Technology Unit 
• Transport and Telecom 
6.0 METHODOLOGY 
1. (a) A Police Officer shall have at least three years service to be considered for posting to any 
specialist section. 
(b) The Commissioner of Police may, for any Police Officer, waive the requirement for three 
years sefVlce. 
(c) An officer desirous of being considered for appointment to a Class One or Class Two 
Specialist Section shall submit an application in writing through the Head of his/her 
Division/Branch/Section and to the Head of the specialist section to which he/she is desirous of 
being appointed. 
2. To be appointed to a Class One Specialist Section, a Police Officer shall be recommended by 
any suitably qualified Police Officer and shall undergo an assessment process which wi11 
include evaluations of his/her:-
1. General performance during their policing career 
11. Fitness as evidenced by his/her sick leave record 
m. Results of a Polygraph Examination 
1v. Results of a Psychometric Evaluation 
v. Aptitude; and 
Vl. Performance during an appropriate period of training at the specialist section . 
. . ./5 



224/5 
3. The appointment of a Police Officer to a Class Two Specialist Section shall be determined 
based upon an assessment process which shall include evaluations of his/her:-
1. General performance during their policing career 
n. Fitness as evidenced by his/her sick leave record 
m. Results of a Polygraph Examination 
1v. Results of Psychometric Evaluation 
v. Aptitude; and 
vt. Performance during an appropriate period of training at the specialist section. 
4. The appointment of a Police Officer to a Oass Three Specialist Section shall be determined 
based upon the Police Officer's general performance during his/her policing career, sick leave 
record and aptitude for the core functions of the Section. 
5. (a) A Police Officer who is assigned to a specialist section shall remain assigned to that section 
for no more than five (5) continuous years while in the same rank. 
(b) Where a Police Officer is promoted during the five years prescribed in subparagraph (a), 
he/she may remain assigned to that section for no more than seven (7) continuous years, 
inclusive of the period spent in the lower rank (s). 
(c) Notwithstanding subparagraph (a) and (b), the Commissioner of Police may extend the 
period of a Police Officer's assignment to a specialist section. 
6. (a) Where the transfer of a Police Officer between the specialist sections is being contemplated, 
that officer shall be required to satisfy the criterion provided for assignment/posting to that 
section, whether or not the contemplated transfer is to another specialist section of the same 
classification as the section from which he/she is being transferred. 
(b) A Police Officer' s period of assignment to more than one specialist section shall be tallied 
together when applying the provisions ofpar3.ooraphs 5(a) and 5(b). 
7. (a) Upon a Police Officer's transfer to a specialist section, he/she shall be required to undergo a 
period of induction whereby the department/section/unit/branch norms, procedures and policies 
may be learnt, working relationships can be established and officers can learn how to function 
effectively and efficiently within their sections. 
(b) Once an officer has demonstrated his/her proficiency in their tasks, focus must be on 
developmental activities whereby officers are expected to accept responsibility for their actions, 
to address any work-related problems, and to achieve and sustain superior levels of 
performance. 
. . ./6 



224/6 
8. (a) Upon an Officer's transfer from a specialist section, he/she shall be required to perform 
general police duties in a line Division for at least two years before being considered for re­
assignment to the same or any other specialist section . 
(b) A Police Officer ' s initial period of re-assignment to a line Division shaJI include an 
assessment of their training needs, after which, these officers shall undergo the appropriate 
refresher training course(s) required to bridge the gap between his/her current competencies and 
the competencies required for effective and efficient general policing duties. 
7.0 AUTHORITY 
Regulation 193 ( 1) (b) of the Police Service Regulations 2007. 
PART III - NIL 
~ 
Commissioner of Police 