*. pith tite Police Orders by Mr. Gary Griffith
Commissioner of Police
Police Administration Building
7 aes cuan aaa Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
% aw Port of Spain
OTH PRIDE Friday 22"! November, 2019
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian employees
of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
No 210 Departmental Order PART I - NIL
PART II
The Victim and Witness Support Unit
GENERAL BACKGROUND
The Victim and Witness Support Unit (VWSU) was established in 2008 (reference Cabinet Minute
No. 488-2007/03/01) with the mandate to bridge the service gap between the Trinidad and Tobago
Police Service (TTPS) and persons affected by crime. In fulfilling its objective, the VWSU provides
victim services which focus on deterrence, investigative assistance and prosecutorial guidance
to assist persons in coping with the debilitating effects of crime and criminal activity.
In tandem with its mandate the VWSU ensures that there is recognition of victims and witnesses’
needs by advocating for victim rights, imparting support through the execution of psychosocial and
counselling interventions as well as fostering meaningful relationships with communities.
The Unit provides the following services, using a two-prong approach in addressing the needs of all
victims and witnesses of crime:

1. Investigative Support (involving all aspects of the investigative and criminal justice process)

2. Psychosocial Support

RANGE OF SERVICES

The following reflects the range of investigative and psychosocial support provided by the VWSU:
1. Investigative Support

Guidance through the Criminal Justice System

e Sensitize victims on basic elements of the investigative and criminal justice system
processes.

e Provide emotional support towards victims/ witnesses so that they successfully and
effectively participate in giving statements, identification parades and various activities in
the investigations.

../2


--- page break ---

EEE ISK ~—~=~—C—
210/2

e Perform liaison services between the police officer and the victim or witness.

e Provide status updates on the progress of investigations.

e Provide emotional support to prepare victims/witnesses to give evidence in Court.

e Accompany victims/witnesses when necessary to court proceedings.

e Accompany  victims/witnesses when necessary to investigative procedures at
hospital/clinic/health centre.

e Emotionally support victims with the preparation of Victim Impact Statements upon request
from the relevant judicial department such at the Office of the Director of Public
Prosecutions or the Magistracy.

2. Psychosocial Support

Individual Level:
e Crisis intervention and counselling to assist victims and witnesses in coping with the trauma
of crime victimization within a confidential environment.
¢ Needs assessment on the impact of crime presented and guidance towards addressing those
needs.
e Referral towards financial support specific to Criminal Injuries Compensation, Funeral
Grants etc.
e Victim advocacy and liaison services with other social Support agencies.
Community Level:

e Providing group crisis intervention to organizations or communities affected by specific
crime incidents.

e Developing and facilitating Support Group interventions for victims of specific crime types.

e Designing and implementing community interventions and programmes aimed at
preventing specific crime-related issues relevant to that region.
e Facilitating psychoeducational workshops with communities, schools and other
stakeholders.
¢ Developing secondary crime prevention initiatives geared towards deterrence of crime and
criminal behaviours.
National Level:
e Develop policies and programmes to reduce issues of crime victimization to the citizenry.
e Contribute to polices, legislation and projects that target national issues regarding crime
victimization.
e Design and implement programmes/initiatives such as educational forum and national
campaigns tailored to national issues of crime victimization


--- page break ---

. 210/3
e Conduct training programmes with government stakeholders to educate on holistic victim
services.
e Collaborate with national agencies towards harmonizing governmental and non-
governmental initiatives that provide victim services.

LOCATIONS IN ALL NINE (9) POLICE DIVISIONS

Head Office

Rivomide Annox Porwok’S sain le

Central Division

Chaguanas Police Station 672-2004 / 671-2005

Eastern Division

Sangre Grande Police Station 691-0875

Northern Division

Maloney Police Station 646-6504

St Joseph Police Station 663-9622

Arima 667-6028

North Eastern Division

Morvant Police Station 626-0370

Port of Spain Division

Besson Street Police Station 623-1395

Riverside Plaza 625-9738

Southern Division

San Fernando Police Station 653-8166

Princes Town Police Station 655-223 1

South Western Division

Penal Police Station 647-5891

Tobago Division

Scarborough Police Station 612-0337 Ext 14059, 14060
ADMINISTRATIVE STRUCTURE
The Deputy Commissioner of Police ‘Administration and Operational Support’ shall have overall
responsibility for the operations of the Victim and Witness Support Unit and the Head of the Victim
and Witness Support Unit shall report to same.
CLIENT POPULATION
The Victim and Witness Support Unit shall provide holistic victim services focused on deterrence,
investigations, prosecutions and tailored support to all victims, as well as witnesses with a
concentration of efforts on matters regarding :

4


--- page break ---

210/4 *
e Homicide
e Domestic Violence
e Sexual Offences
e Road Fatalities
These efforts are largely due to the significant levels of trauma assossciated with these matters,
which impact both investgations as well as the functioning of individuals and communities.
STAKEHOLDERS
The VWSU works with a number of internal and external stakeholders in its service delivery. These
include various units of the TTPS, government ministries and agencies, nonprofit / non-
governmental organizations, corporate entities, community based groups, as well as social and
religious groups.
Key Government Stakeholders Key Non-Governmental Stakeholder
e Ministry of National Security and its various e Rape Crisis Society
departments e 800-Save
e Ministry of Social Development and Family e Coalition Against Domestic Violence
Services e FEEL
e Office of the Prime Minister, Gender Affairs e Single Fathers Association
Division e ALTA
e Ministry of Education e Atrive Alive
e Ministry of Community Development, Culture e Domestic Violence Survivors
and the Arts Reaching Out
e Ministry of Sports and Youth Affairs e Families in Action
e Ministry of Housing and Urban Development
e Ministry of Health
e Office of the Director of Public Prosecution
e Children’s Authority of Trinidad and Tobago
e Any other Government/Non - Governmental
agency
LAS


--- page break ---

a 210/5
HUMAN RESOURCE ALLOCATION
The VWSU shall be staffed with fifty-two (52) employees comprising:
e One (1) Manager
e One (1) Clinical Psychologist
e Five (5) Business Operations Officers
e One (1) Business Operations Officer II
e One (1) Administrative Officer
e One (1) Research Officer
e Four (4) Victim and Witness Support Supervisors (one [1] based at Tobago)
e Thirty-six (36) Victim and Witness Support Officers (four [4] per Division)
e Two (2) Drivers
EMPLOYEE TYPE
All members of staff of the Victim and Witness Support Unit are civilian-contracted employees.
QUALIFICATIONS
All Victim and Witness Support Officers possess a minimum of an Undergraduate Degree in a
Social Science such as Counselling, Social Work, Psychology or Behavioral Science with at least
two (2) years’ experience in a social service setting. Post-graduate qualification in the field of Social
Work, Counselling or a related area would be considered an asset.
DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Manager, Victim and Witness Support Unit:
The Manager of the VWSU is responsible for managing, developing and implementing policies for
the Victim and Witness Support Unit, as well as providing and co-ordinating training for Police
Officers. The Manager:
e Co-ordinates and provides training to Police Officers in the area of Victim and Witness
support;
e Develops and implements policies and procedures to meet the TTPS’ vision for the Unit;
e Makes operational improvements for more efficient and effective service delivery;
e Makes public presentations to external agencies regarding a 24-hour hotline service to deal
with victims and witnesses of crime;
e Meets with stakeholders to develop protocols and enhance services that address the needs of
the community;
e Determines appropriate service levels for the Victim and Witness Support Unit; and
e Performs any other related duties assigned by the Commissioner of Police or authorized
designee.
.../6


--- page break ---

: ie’
210/6
Victim and Witness Support Supervisor
The Victim and Witness Support Supervisor:
e Supervises and conducts debriefing sessions where staff and community members
experience trauma and crisis;
e Conducts assessments that are problematic for Victim and Witness Support Officers under
supervision;
e Supervises all the administrative functions required in the respective regions, and address
internal departmental issues;
e Implements all standards and policies set by the management of the Victim and Witness
Support Unit;
e Assesses and implements training of undergraduate students of the University of the West
Indies and other tertiary institutions;
e Contributes to the training and development of Divisions and Branches by attending
conferences and meetings and assisting in their programmes;
e Attends fortnightly Team Leaders’ meetings with the Manager, to account for all operations
for the offices that fall under his/her purview; and
e Any other duties assigned by the Manager of the Victim and Witness Support Unit, the
Commissioner of Police or authorized designee.
Victim and Witness Support Officer
The Victim and Witness Support Officer:
e Assesses the needs of victims and witnesses of crime and tailors solutions to suit those needs;
e Assists victims and witnesses of crime to cope with trauma and other effects of crime;
e Advises victims and witnesses of crime of the progress of investigations and the prosecution
of cases;
e Provides emotional support and advice to victims and witnesses of crime before, during and
after a trial;
e Provides victims of crime with early assistance in order to prevent repeat victimization;
e Establishes a system to identify repeat victims quickly and accurately;
e Liaises with support agencies on behalf of victims of crime;
e Prepares monthly reports or other reports that may be requested; and
e Performs any other related task as required of the Manager.
PART IU— NIL
voON .
|
Me
Commiss1 f Police
