No.26 
Police Orders by Dr. Dwayne Gibbs 
Commissioner ofPolice 
Police Administration Building 
Cor. Edward & SackviJJe Streets 
Port of Spain 
Monday 7th February 2011 
~This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian 
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press) 
Departmental Order PART 1-Nil 
PART II 
AIR SUPPORT SERVICES 
In pursuit of providing effective and efficient policing services to the citizens of the 
nation, the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service will utilize in a strategic manner all 
contemporary policing resources at its disposal. 
The Trinidad and Tobago Police Service in partnership with the Special Anti-Crime Unit 
of Trinidad and Tobago (SAUTT) will incorporate the use of SAUTT's Air Support Unit which 
consists of four (4) helicopters in our service delivery capacity. Helicopters will be given the task 
patrol the streets and neighbourhoods of Trinidad and Tobago from the air; responding to calls 
for service concerning crimes and major incidents as well as providing situational awareness 
support to the Services ground resources. 
The use of helicopters as support for ground policing activities has proven to be 
extremely effective being best described as a ' force multiplier'; meaning their situational 
awareness capability, can equal dozens of resources at ground level. 
The presence of a police helicopter at a crime scene, major event or routine patrol will 
provide citizens with a heightened level of assurance knowing that the police are in a position to 
detect and deter criminal activity. In addition, the presence of a hovering helicopter will enhance 
officer safety for members engaged in various operational activities such as a stop and search. 
A deployment schedule has been developed for regular strategic patrols over the entire 
twin island landscape. This will ensure that the most efficient use of this resource will be utilized 
at the times of day when air support is most needed. When not on an actual air patrol, the Air 
Support Unit will be on standby status with the ability to deploy at short notice . 
...... /2 
26/2 



The primary helicopters, Viper 1 and Viper 2, are equipped with technology that can 
provide situational awareness during both day time and night time operations. Communication 
between the Command Centre and the helicopters will ensure that air support be directed to areas 
of need as well as to provide the link between the helicopter crew and ground resources . 
Operations in need of air support during their ground activities shall direct their request to the 
Command Centre via wireless communications. 
In the event that helicopter support is required for a specific planned operation, an 
advanced request should be made by contacting Superintendent E. Castillo at 769-0933 or 
385-3962. 
Commissioner ofPolice 