, 
No. 25 
Police Orders by 
Commissioner ofPolice 
Police Administration Building 
Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets 
Port of Spain 
Monday 2"d March, 2009 
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian 
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press) 
Departmental Order PART I- NIL 
PART-IT 
PROPER MANAGEMENT OF WASHING AND POLISHING OF 
POLICE VEHICLES AT STATIONS 
INFORMATION 
A recent audit examination ofthe records on the above caption by the External Auditors, revealed some 
disturbing irregularities with respect to the washing and polishing ofPolice vehicles at stations. 
These irregularities are now the subject of a query before the Ministry of National Security. 
INTENTION 
In keeping with the concerns raised in the Auditor's report, this Departmental Order seeks to address 
strategies which when implemented will alleviate existing deficiencies and as well provide a more 
efficient system of checks and balances at stations. 
STRATEGIES 
With immediate effect therefore, heads ofDivisions/ Branches/Units are to take the necessary steps to 
implement the following measures :-
• Where Car Washers are to be employed, short term contracts are to be drawn up 
for a period of three (3) months in the first instance. Where the job performance 
of the car washer is found to be satisfactory, the employer can extend his/ her 
service for an additional six (6) months. 
• The Second Division Officer in charge of the Station must maintain two (2) 
registers for Audit purposes. Each register must be certified on a daily basis . 
. . . . . . ./2 



25/2 
• Each Register must reflect a breakdown of vehicles washed/ polished and bearing the 
signature of the Inspector I Sergeant in charge of the Station along with the appropriate 
certification . These registers are to be utilized alternatively and must be submitted to the 
Finance Branch on the 5111 day of each month. 
• Each Station/Unit , must submit a monthly return of Police vehicles inclusive of rentals 
assigned to each station!Unit. 
• Claims addressed to the Division I Station from the washers must clearly indicate a 
breakdown of the type of vehicle (s) washed, the vehicle registration number, along with 
the cost. The Claim must be dated and signature of the washer affixed, as well as a 
certificate inscribed by the S.D.Oilc of the station. 
• Given the need for belt tightening measures, particularly at this time, S.D.Oi/c Stations are 
reminded that vehicles are to be washed only when the need arises. 
• For clarity and accountability , a standard format has been established . In this regard, the 
attached "Specimen" is forwarded for your guidance and applicability when presenting 
your submissions . 
CONCLUSION 
The issue raised at caption, if not controlled and managed efficiently can cause further problems to the 
Service and by extension the Commissioner of Police, who has indirect responsibility for Financial 
accountability . With this in mind, it is instructive that Heads ofDivisions I Branches/ Units bring this 
Departmental Order to the attention of your charges when engaged in Lecture Sessions. 