Police Orders by 
Commissioner of Police 
Police Administration Building 
Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets 
Port of Spain 
WednesdavJ4th October, 2008 10~~~ - · ...... .--~- (This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian 
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press) 
No. 240 Departmental Order PART I- Na 
PART II 
Un- Authorized Entry to Customs Areas By Police Officers 
1. Information 
Within recent times there has been an increase in the incidence of Police Officers entering 
restricted Customs Areas at legal Ports without the necessary authorization from the 
Comptroller of Customs and permission from the Commissioner of Police. This situation if 
aHowed to continue has the propensity not only to strain the cordial relationship which 
exists between the two organisations but it may also constitute a breach of the Law. The 
Customs Regulations 78:01 provides: 
Regulation 86 
nNo person may enter the Baggage Room or other place reserved for the 
examination of baggage except the proper Officers and the passengers to whom 
the baggage belongs and such other persons as may be specially permitted by the 
Comptroller to enter the Baggage Room or other place as mentioned above" . 
Regulation 103 
"The Comptroller may cause to be enclosed or set apart by barricades or in any 
other manner any part of a Customs area or any other place at which persons may 
be authorized to land from or go on board any aircraft or ship arriving in Trinidad 
and Tobago and may cause to be posted notices at or in such enclosure or place so 
set apart indicating that only passengers and authorized persons are permitted to 
enter therein, and no person other than a passenger or person duly authorized by 
the proper Officer may enter any place so enclosed or set apart". 
2. Intention 
This Order is intended to sensitise police officers as to the authority by which they may 
enter any Customs Area in pursuit of their lawfuJ duty and the procedure to be followed. 
3. General 
No police officer shall enter any Customs Area without the expressed permission of the 
Commissioner of Police, which shall be disclosed to the Officer in Charge upon their 
arrival. Listed at appendix 'A' are the Customs Sea and Air Ports in Trinidad and Tobago . 
. . ./2 



240/2 
4. Communication 
Heads of Divisions , Branches , Sections and Unit Commanders are instructed to make this 
Departmental Order the subject of future lectures when speaking to personnel under their 
command . 
5. Authority 
Police Service Regulations 193 (1) (b) 
6. Conclusion 
This order takes effect from the date of publication. 



Appendix 'A' 
SlTFFERANCE \VHARVES 
LOCATION NAME 
Sea Lots, Port of Spain National Petroleum Marketin~ Company 
Sea Lots, Port of Spain Caribbean Salvage Limited 
Sea Lots. Port of Spain National Fisheries Comoanv (1995) 
NORTH Chaguaramas Peake Marine Limited 
Clwruaramas Bav Chaguaramas 
Point Gourde Point Gourde 
Point Tembladora Alcoa steamshio Co. Ltd 
Point Lisas MITI AL Steel Point Lisas Limited 
CENTRAL PointLisas Federation Chemicals 
Point Lisas Y ara Trinidad Limited 
Usine Ste. Madeline Cioero River 
Claxton Bav Trinidad Contractors Limited 
Point Fortin United British Oilfields 
Cedros Cedros 
SOUTH Point~a-Pierre Trinidad Leaseholds Ltd 
Brighton. La Brea Trinidad Lake Asphalt Operating Co. Ltd 
Galeota Point BPTT Galeota Base 
Sobo Trinidad Oilfields Limited 
Icacos Point Icacos Point 
TOBAGO Plvmouth Tobago 
OTHER Cronstadt Island Baroid Trinidad Limited 
SEAPORTS 
Dock Road. Port of Spain Port of Soain 
NORTH Chaguaramas Peake Marine Limited 
Point Gourde Point Gourde 
CENTRAL Point Lisas PLIPDECO 
Point Fortin PETROTRIN 
Brighton. La Brea Trinidad Lake Asphalt Operating Co. Ltd 
SOUTH San Fernando San Fernando 
Cedros Cedros 
Pointe-a-Pierre PETROTRIN 
Point~a-Pierre Texaco (Trinidad) Limited 
Scarborough, Tobago Port of Scarborough 
OTHER Charlotteville Tobago Charlotteville Facilitv 
AIR PC 
I Trinidad 
Tobago 
I Piarco 