Police Orders by Dr. Dwayne Gibbs 
Commissioner of Police 
Police Administration Building 
Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets 
Port of Spain 
Thursday 25th November 2010 
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian 
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press) 
Departmental Order PART I-NIL 
PART Tl 
The Financial Intelligence Unit of Trinidad and Tobago Act 11 of 2009. 
I. INFORMATION 
The Financial Intelligence Unit of Trinidad and Tobago Act 11 of 2009, was proclaimed and 
given effect by the President of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago on February 9th 2010 
which authorized the Commissioner of Police to receive Reports from the Director of the 
Financial Intelligence Unit hereinafter referred to as the F.I.U in keeping with section 15 of the 
said Financial Intelligence Unit ofTrinidad and Tobago Act 11 of2009 . 
Section 15(3) states "For the purpose of this section, the Minister with responsibility for 
National Security may by Order prescribe the law enforcement authorities to which the F.I. U 
shall submit all reports within the context of the subject matter". In order to fulfill this 
obligation the instructions contained herein are to be noted and strictly followed by all members 
of the Police Service . 
2. INTENTION 
This order is intended to bring to the attention of all members of the Police Service their role 
and responsibilities with respect to the reporting , recording and investigating of all reports made 
to them in keeping with Section 15 of the Financial Intelligence Unit of Trinidad and Tobago 
Act 11 of2009 and to set guidelines and instructions for the efficient and effective performance 
of their duties . 
3. METHOD 
1. Whenever a Suspicious Activity Report (SAR) is reported to the F.I.U and in the opinion of 
the Director of the F.I.U it requires further investigation, he shall forward a report to the 
Commissioner of Police who is authorized by the said Act to receive all such reports. 
11. The Commissioner of Police has delegated the function of receiving and investigating all 
reports referred to at (i) (herein after referred to as the report (s)) to the Assistant 
Commissioner with responsibility for the Financial Investigation Branch . 
111. The Assistant Commissioner referred to at (ii) shall develop and implement procedures and 
policies for receiving, recording and investigating all reports delivered to his office . 
. . ./2 



235/2 
tv. The Financial Investigations Branch shall have the responsibility for investigating all 
reports passed to it by the Assistant Commissioner_ 
v. The Head of the Financial Investigations Branch shall ensure all reports received are 
recorded in a register that shall be kept in his office and given a unique reference number. 
This number shall run consecutively. 
vt. It shall be the duty of the Head of the Financial Investigations Branch to ensure all reports 
are thoroughly investigated and the appropriate action taken in accordance with the relevant 
legislation, service policy and procedures. 
4. ADMINISTRATION 
1. Upon receipt of reports from the Commissioner, it shall be the duty of the Assistant 
Commissioner in charge to ensure such reports are passed to the Head of the Financial 
Investigations Branch who shaJI immediately assign an officer to investigate. 
11. The investigating officer referred to at 4 (i) shall act with due diligence to have the matter 
properly investigated and submit an initial report within fourteen (14) days of first receipt of 
such reports to the Assistant Commissioner in charge through the Head of the F.I.B. 
111. The report at (ii) shall contain action taken, statements recorded and future actions to be 
taken along with any recommendation. All reports and information obtained during such 
investigation shall be treated with strict confidentiality and shall not be disclosed to persons 
not connected with the investigation. 
tv. Where no further action can be taken on any report due to lack of evidence, it shall be the 
duty of the Head of the Financial Investigation Branch to inform the Assistant 
Commissioner in charge in writing for the information of the Director F.I.U. A copy of such 
report is to be maintained at the Financial Investigation Branch for the record. 
v. All files, records and information that come into the Financial Investigation Branch as a 
result of any investigation shall be kept securely and safely for production upon request by 
any Court or other competent authority and shall not be destroyed or defaced in any manner 
without the written consent of a competent authority. 
vt. Notwithstanding subsections (i) to (v) and Standing Order No. 13, no senior officer 
mentioned therein without "specific authority" shall inspect, deface, or destroy or cause to 
be destroyed any files, records or information which is held at the Financial Investigations 
Branch without the approval of the competent authority in writing. 
vu. It shall be the duty of the Head of the Financial Investigation Branch to produce upon 
request to any court of competent jurisdiction or other person vested with "specific 
authority" all files, records and information held at or by any member of the Financial 
Investigation Branch. 
. .. /3 



235/2 
vm. It shall be the duty of the Head Financial Investigation Branch to submit a monthly report 
to the Assistant Commissioner in charge of all reports received from the F.I.U stating what 
action has been taken or is contemplated. The Assistant Commissioner in charge upon 
receipt of such reports shall then forward a return to the Commissioner of Police for his 
information and the attention of the Director F.I.U. 
5. TERRORIST FINANCING 
Notwithstanding sections 4 and 5, where the Director F.I.U submits any report to the 
Commissioner of Police for investigation in relation to any activity involving Terrorist 
Financing, it shall be the duty of the Head Special Anti Crime Unit upon receipt of such 
report to immediately contact the Head Special Branch who shall immediately initiate a 
separate investigation as it relates to issues ofNational Security and Terrorism and keep the 
Commissioner informed. 
11 During the course of any investigation involving Terrorism or the Financing of Terrorism, it 
shall be the duty of the Assistant Commissioner referred to at section ( 4) subsection (ii), 
Head Special Branch and the Head Financial Investigation Branch to hold regular briefing 
sessions to determine the way forward, share information and intelligence , plan and execute 
courses of action to investigate the matter thoroughly and professionally. 
111. In the discharge of their responsibilities to investigate any report ofTerrorist Financing and 
or Terrorism, officers so assigned shall be guided by the procedure as set out in the 
Proceeds of Crime Act 2000 and the Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) Act 2010. 
1v. Nothing said in this order shall prevent the Head of Special Branch, the Head of the 
Financial Investigations Branch or any other Head of Division, Branch or Section from 
collaborating or conducting joint operations during an investigation. 
6. GENERAL 
Officers involved in the receipt and investigation of reports from the Director F .I.U are 
expected to perform their duties in a prompt, efficient and professional manner. Secrecy and 
integrity of all information obtained is critical to the success of the Unit, the process and any 
Court matter that may flow from any investigation. Officers are therefore reminded that it is 
their duty to treat every report with strict confidentiality and impartiality befitting their office 
and high esteem placed in them . 
Commissioner ofPo1ice 