No. 200 
Police Orders by 
Commissioner of Police 
Police Administration Building 
Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets 
Port of Spain 
Friday 16th November 2007 
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian 
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press) 
Departmental Order PART I - NIL 
PART IT 
NEW MOTIO OF THE POLICE SERVICE 
1. INFORMATION 
1: I On Monday I Oth September 2007, the Police Service in its thrust to further deepen its 
transfonnation philosophy, embarked on a process of re-branding aimed at creating a 
completely new image for itself. 
1:2 In this regard, the Motto of the Police Service has been modified to read, "TO 
PROTECT AND SERVE WITH P.R.LD.E". 
1:3 The word P.R.I .D.E is an acronym, which has special significance for the future of the 
police service. It underscores our promise to the public to provide: 
• Presence 
• Relationships 
• Image 
• Devotion 
• Efficiency 
l :4 The ultimate goal of the transformation process is to once more ensure public trust and 
confidence in the Police Service, by creating a professional organization whose 
employees are committed to the delivery of quality service and the promotion of social 
justice in Trinidad and Tobago . 
2. INTENTION 
2:1 To apprise members of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service of the modification to the 
Police Motto . 
. . ./2 



200/2 
3. METHODOLOGY 
3: 1 With immediate effect the existing Police Logo is 'withdrawn ' and substituted with the 
new logo , which carries the words "To Protect and Serve with P.R.I.D.E". 
3 :2 All official document s, letterheads , literature , stamps, flags , vehicles , etc are to carry the 
new logo. 
3:3 This list is not intended to be exhausti ve and includes all accoutrements issued to Police 
Officer s in the performance of their duties . 
4. ADMINISTRATION 
4: 1 Heads of Division/Branch shaH ensure that all official documents , letterheads , literature 
stamps, vehicles etc in their Division/Branch are changed to reflect the new logo. 
5. CONCLUSION 
5: 1 The logo has been modified to reflect the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service which will 
be a model organization that will: 
1. Be accountable to the law and not to itself. 
2. Respect human rights and give top priority to protecting the safety and rights of 
individuals and private groups . 
3. Be accountable to democratic government structures and to its community . 
4. Be transparent in its activities . 
5. Engage community participation. 
PART ill -NIL 
kon~, 