No. 222 
Police Orders by Dr. Dwayne Gibbs 
Commissioner of Police 
Police Administration Building 
Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets 
Port of Spain 
Wednesday lOth November 2010 
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian 
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press) 
Departmental Order PART 1- NIL 
PARTll 
OVERTIME ASSOCIATED WITH THE CHRISTMAS CRIME PLAN 
1. INFORMATION 
1:1 Building on the successes achieved in addressing crime during the earlier 120 day crime plan, 
Division Commanders have formulated Crime Plans and Strategies in anticipation of criminal 
activities during the festive season leading up to Christmas. 
The aforementioned plans require that a proactive, aggressive approach in an intelligence led 
fashion, be adopted by the members of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service in order to 
continue to provide Policing Services to the citizens of Trinidad and Tobago and to ensure a 
reduction in criminal activities. 
In order to facilitate the effective and efficient execution of the aforementioned Crime Plans, 
the Commissioner of Police has authorized the continued approach to additional compensation 
by means of a 12 hour weekly commuted overtime allowance. 
1.2 INTENTION 
The intention of this order is to apprise Police Officers as to the procedure being adopted in 
ensuring that members of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service are properly remunerated for 
the extra hours performed in assisting in the execution of the formulated plans mentioned at 1.1 
above. 
1.3 METHODOLOGY 
The following approach shall be adopted in an effort to ensure that Members of the Trinidad 
and Tobago Police are properly remunerated for all extra hours worked in excess of the regular 
forty hour work week provided for at regulation 66(1) of the Police Service Regulations 2007 . 
.. ./2 



222/2 
1. Effective the 1
51 
day of November 2010 to December 3151 201 0, members of the Trinidad and 
Tobago Police Service who are not in receipt of a Commuted allowance as provided for at 
Regulation 66(7)(a) shall be given the option to perform duties totaling 52 hours per week and 
shall be paid a commuted allowance at the end of each month. 
2. With reference to members of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service who are desirous of 
exercising the option to work the extra hours and not receive the aforementioned commuted 
allowance, such officers may, in the alternative , exercise their option to submit overtime claims 
in relation to the extra hours worked. 
3. Division Commanders have submitted the names of those members who have expressed their 
desire to perform duties in excess of the normal 40 hour work week and receive the Commuted 
Allowance mentioned at para (1) above. Such names shall be submitted to the Senior 
Superintendent Finance Branch in an effort to ensure that the members concerned are paid the 
said Commuted Allowance in a timely manner. 
4. Members who are attached to Specialist Sections and are already in receipt of the Commuted 
Allowance shall be paid a sum of$3000.00 on or about the 30th December 2010 such sum being 
an incentive award to the said officers. 
2. CONCLUSION 
In order that there is success in the execution of the above mentioned plans , there must be a 
total effort from all members of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service , regardless of where 
they are attached or what their specific duties are. Additionally the officers need to ensure that 
they are well coordinated, prepared and committed to their duties. 
P~T ~ 
C ( ~> fP 1· OtnmlSSIOner 0 0 ICe 