No. 238 
Police Orders by 
Commissioner ofPolice 
Police Administration Building 
Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets 
Port of Spain 
Friday 26th November 2010 
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian 
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press) 
Departmental Order PART I- NIL 
PART IT 
Effective Utilization of Sick Leave Extension 
It has been observed that officers on sick leave have been applying for vacation leave as an 
alternative , more so, when their sick leave exceeds fourteen (14) days, rather than apply for an 
extension of sick leave . This practice has dire administrative and personal consequences. As 
such, members of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service are being advised to consider the 
following options: 
Extension of Sick Leave 
Under Sec. 90 (1) of the Police Service Regulations 2007, an officer may seek an extension of 
sick leave while in Trinidad and Tobago. She/he, according to subsection (2), shall inform by 
any means within first three (3) days, the Second Division Officer in charge of the police 
station where he/she is posted or the Head of the Division, who shall communicate such 
information to the Commissioner. The Commissioner may grant an extension of such leave 
with full pay, partial pay or no pay. 
According to Sec. 91 (I) an extension of sick leave may be granted to an officer who becomes 
sick while on vacation leave outside of Trinidad and Tobago , and who has exhausted his/her 
sick leave. Such leave shall be granted with full pay, partial pay or no pay. 
Entitlement to Full Pay 
Full Pay shall be granted to an officer to the extent o:( at maximu~ the number of days sick 
leave unutilized by the officer over the five (5) year period preceding the year in which the 
application for an extension of sick leave is made. For example , an officer who has not taken 
sick leave within a five (5) year period would be entitled to seventy (70) days extended sick 
leave with full pay. Whereas , an officer who has taken twenty-eight (28) days over a two (2) 
year period would be entitled to the forty-two ( 42) unutilized days of sick leave with full pay. 
In accordance with Sec. 91 (7) an officer who is certified by a Medical Board to be suffering 
from such disease as to render him unfit for duty, may be granted sick leave with full pay for a 
period not exceeding six ( 6) months. 
. . ./2 



238/2 
Sec. 8 further states, that if after the period mentioned in sub-regulation (7), the officer is unfit 
for duty, he/she may be granted vacation leave, if any, for which he/she is eligible. 
Officers must be mindful that according to Sec. 75 (3), an officer may be recalled from 
vacation leave, and thus, the granting of vacation leave as an alternative to extended sick leave 
creates administrative complications for the payroll department, and a distorted analysis of the 
number of officers on actual vacation leave as against those on vacation leave due to prolonged 
illness. In addition, leave other than sick leave, injury leave and maternity leave shall be 
granted subject to the exigencies of the service, therefore an ill officer applying for vacation 
leave due to illness, may cause more harm to him/her if the request for vacation leave is denied . 
PART III-NIL 