No. 33 
Police Orders by Dr. Dwayne Gibbs 
Commissioner of Police 
Police Administration Building 
Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets 
Port of Spain 
Wednesday 71b March 2012 
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian 
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press) 
Departmental Order PART I -NIL 
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO POUCE SERVICE 
ESTABUSHMENT OF A POLYGRAPH UNIT 
1. Rationale: 
Effective and successful criminal investigations depend on many factors including the 
locating and examination of physical evidence, accurate victim/witness accounts, 
probing interviews and the use of investigative aids such as the polygraph. 
Polygraph technology has been employed by law enforcement entities universally as an 
"investigative tool" to be used in support of obtaining a statement of admission from a 
suspect. 
The results of polygraph examinations are not admissible in court as evidence however, 
when presented to an accused person during the course of an interview, can serve as a 
catalyst in obtaining an incriminating statement regarding the crime being investigated. 
In addition, a polygraph examination can assist in the vetting process when selecting 
individuals to enter into the ranks of the Police Service or areas of the Service which 
deal with extremely sensitive matters. 
As a result of recognizing the value and importance of polygraph examinations the 
Police Service has established a Polygraph Unit with effect from January 1, 2012 . 
....... ./2 



33/2 
2. Location and auth orized stren gth: 
The Polygraph Unit will be under the Command of the Deputy Commissioner ofPolice , 
Crime and Support . 
The Polygraph Unit, examination suites and administrative office , is located at Police 
Headquarters, St. Vincent Street , Port of Spain. Contact information : 625-5453 , 627-
507l(Fax). 
The Unit will be staffed by Police Officers who have been appropriately trained and 
certified by the Canadian Police College, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. 
The strength ofthe Unit will consist of: 
• Chief Polygraph Examiner 1 
• Deputy ChiefPolygrapb Examiner 1 
• Polygraph Examiners (Levels 1-111) 12 
• Support Staff I 
The positions of all polygraph examiners will not be rank specific. Polygraph examiners 
will not be assigned to any investigative duties to avoid any potential conflict with their 
main role. 
3. Policy: 
All requests for polygraph examinations , both internally and from external agencies, 
shall be made to the Commissioner of Police. 
Final arrangements for Polygraph Examinations will be made by the Chief Polygraph 
Examiner. 
The decision made by a Polygraph Examiner on the subject 's suitability for an 
examination will be final. 
Written consent must be obtained from a subject prior to conducting a polygraph 
examination. 
If the subject is a young person, written consent must be obtained from a parent or legal 
guardian . 
Persons formally charged with an offence will not be polygrapbed . 
Pregnant women will not be polygraphed . 
...... ./3 



33/3 
The investigating officer shall be present to monitor the polygraph examination and be 
immediately available to the Polygraph Examiner. 
All potential Police inductees will submit to a polygraph examination as part of the 
selection process. 
4. Procedure: 
A. Investigating Officer : 
Fully interview the subject prior to offering a polygraph examination. 
If the subject agrees to a polygraph examination, contact the Polygraph Unit to schedule 
the test. 
If the subject is a young person, meet with and obtain written consent from a parent or 
legal guardian. 
Be present to monitor and be immediately available during the polygraph examination. 
B. Polygraph Examiner 
Review all reports, discuss the case with the investigating officer and determine the 
suitability ofthe subject. 
If a polygraph examination is not recommended, provide reasons to the Investigating 
Officer. 
Complete the necessary polygraph examination reports. 
C. Chief Polygraph Examiner 
Review all requests for polygraph examinations and if approved facilitate an 
examination in a timely manner. 
Liaise with Human Resources Branch when requested to perform pre-employment and 
specific polygraph examinations for vetting purposes. 
Advance the utilization of polygraph examinations as part of a criminal investigation 
strategy within the Police Service. 
. ..... ./4 



33/4 
Provide advice to the Office of the Commissioner regarding operational and legal trends or 
decisions regarding the use of polygraph examinations. 
Ensure polygraph examiners maintain required certification to perform polygraph 
examinations. 
Effectively and efficiently manage the Polygraph Unit. 
PARTS Il & Ill- NIL 
@ 
CommiSSioner ofPolice 