(eS) Police Orders by
Be Commissioner of Police
RAy/4 Police Administration Building
mA“ Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
scone tn a Port of Spain
> Prorecr a0 se Friday 14" March 2014
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
No. 37 Departmental Order PART I —NIL
PART II
WOMEN POLICE 1. In consideration of the nature of the roles and responsibilities of Women
WEARING OF Police Officers, permission has been granted for female officers to use their
PANTS uniform pants during both daylight and night time duties, if they so choose to do.
Notwithstanding, the uniform skirt remains part of the uniform and is to be
continued to be worn by female officers during night time/day time duties, if they
so choose to do.
However, uniform skirts must be worn on special occasions/ceremonial duties e.g
attending Court (Magistrate and High Court), Independence Day Parade, Memorial
Day Parade, Opening of Parliament, Opening of the Law Term and Church Service
of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service or any other official responsibilities.
WOMEN POLICE De It has been noticed that a number of female officers wear their hair in styles
WEARING OF that cannot accommodate the uniform head dress. Officers are reminded to adhere
HAIRSTYLES to Standing Order No. 6, Section 5(2a).
WOMEN POLICE 3: Women Police Officers are to adhere to the following Instructions regarding
UNIFORM their Uniform:-
GUIDELINES
Under no circumstances Police Uniforms are to be altered/cut/tightened/shortened.
On receipt, if your uniform needs alteration due to improper fit, you are to return
same to the Women Affairs Unit for the appropriate adjustment within one (1)
week. Persons found wearing an unofficially altered uniform shall be charged with
defacing Government Property in accordance with Police Service Act 2006 Section
53(2f).
w/2


--- page break ---

37/2
WOMEN POLICE Police Service Act 2006 Section 53(2f) States a Police Officer who :- pawns, sells,
UNIFORM makes away with, abandons or wilfully spoils or damages his arms .accoutrements,
GUIDELINES clothing or any public property. If found guilty is liable on summary conviction to
(cont’d) a fine of thirty thousand dollars ($30,000) and to imprisonment for five years.
(1) Uniform Skirt is to be worn no shorter than 2 inches below your knee.
It is not to be tight fitting.
(2) Uniform Jacket is not to be tight fitting, the flap at the back must lie
flat and not wide open.
(3) Pants to be worn must only be those made by the present provider,
Janouras Ltd/Police Master Stores.
(4) Only silver stud earrings 4mm in size are to be worn with the Police
Uniform.
(5) No Body Pierced earrings (tongue rings/eyebrows rings/anklets etc.) are
to be worn with the Police Uniform.
(6) If False nails (French tips, Acrylics) are worn it must be short and only
natural nail polish worn, in accordance with Standing Order 6 Section
(2d).
(7) Tattoos are not to be visible on your body parts not covered by the
Police Uniform.
PART III - NIL
missioner of Po ll
