No. 49 
Police Orders by 
Commissioner of Police 
Police Administration Building 
Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets 
Port of Spain 
Wednesday 241h March 2010 
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian 
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press) 
Departmental Order PART I- NIL 
PARTD 
THE POLICE SERVICE (TRAINEES) REGULATIONS , 2007 
IN ACCORDANCE WITH 
SECTION 14 OF THE :POLICE SERVICE ACT 2006 
These regulations may be cited as the Police Service (Trainees) Regulations, 2007. 
These regulations shall come into operation on such date as the Commissioner of Police may appoint by 
Departmental Order. 
Interpretation 
In the regulations: 
"Clean Shaven" shall include the shaving of the hair on the throat. 
"Commissioner" means the Commissioner of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service. 
"Inappropriate Conduct" means an unwelcome sexual advance, a request for a sexual favour, or other 
verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature when: 
• Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly as a term or condition of a 
trainee's successful completion ofthe training program. 
• Submission to or rejection of such conduct by a trainee is used as the basis for completing 
progress reports or other decisions affecting the trainees participation in a Police Academy or 
Police Service Activity. 
• Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with the trainee's work 
performance or participation in a Police Academy or Police Service Activity or creating an 
intimidating, hostile or offensive training or work environment. 
"Medical Board" means a board for the medical examination of a trainee, which is appointed by the 
Commissioner of Police. 
"A Night Pass" means a period ofleave granted to a trainee between the hours of 6:00pm on the day of 
issue and 6:00am in the morning of the following day. 
"Officer in Charge Police Academy" means the senior ranking First Division Officer responsible for the 
Police Academy. 
. . ./2 



49/2 
''Provost" refers to the person appointed as the bead administrator of the Police Academy who has 
responsibility for training, education and development for all TTPS officers. 
"Registered Medical Practitioner" refers to medical practitioner who has been registered with the 
Medical Board of Trinidad and Tobago under the provisions of the Medical Board Act, Chap. 
29:50. 
"Sick Leave" refers to a period of absence due to illness. 
"Supervisor" includes any police officer, civilian employee or contract employee of the Trinidad and 
Tobago Police Service who has responsibility for the supervision, education and/or training of a police 
trainee . 
"Trainee" refers to a person other than a police officer, recruited by the Police Service and undergoing a 
programme of training at the Police Academy in order to be appointed a police constable . 
"Train ing Identification Card" refers to the formal photo ID issued to a trainee undergoing a 
programme of training at the Police Academy in order to be appointed a police constable . 
"Weeken d L eave" means a period of leave granted to a trainee between 6:00pm Friday and 6:00am on 
the Monday immediately following the Friday on which the leave was granted. 
"Whiskers" mean hair usually grown on the sides of the face and commonly caJied 'sideburns' , 
extensions of hair on the upper lip, called 'handlebar' moustache or 'walrus ' moustache . 
"Inspec tor Ind uction Programme" Means the officer who bears responsibility for the effective and 
efficient operation, delivery and support for the recruitment induction programme. 
PART I 
Records of Trainees 
1. The Senior Ranking Police Officer of the Academy shall keep a personal record of each trainee and it 
shall contain: 
a) The trainee 's name 
b) A photo image of the trainee 
c) The trainee's place and date ofbirth 
d) A description of the trainee 
e) A copy of the Trainee ' s fingerprints 
f) Particulars of marriage, if any, and children, if any 
g) Trainee 's performance 
h) Tardiness 
i) Medical history 
j) Special Qualification 
k) A record of the results of examinations at which the officer was a candidate 



49/3 
2. A computer system with the necessary software application (Conduct Registrar) shall be kept at the 
Police academy. It is a record in which is entered the following: 
a) Breaches of discipline and related action 
b) Awards and Rewards 
3. The Senior Ranking Police Officer of the Academy shall , on the "Passing Out" of a trainee , submit a 
form known as "Trainees Passing-Out Report , form together with all pertinent data referred to above 
to the Division/Branch to which the officer is posted. 
Identification Card 
1. a) Training identification cards shall be issued to all trainees and shall bear their photograph in 
uniform, training number, and name of the trainee to whom it is issued . 
b) The Commissioner or his appointee shall ensure that the trainee to whom such card is issued signs 
the identification card. Such card shall bear the signature of the Senior Ranking Police Officer of 
the Academy. 
2. Training identification cards are to be used for the purpose of identifying such persons as bona fide 
trainees of the Police Service. 
(1) A trainee shall present his/her identification card on demand as follows: 
(a) To all first Division Officers and Inspectors on their visits or inspections to the Police 
Academy or the station where the trainee is undergoing on-the-job training. 
(b) To the Sentry on entry to any police building or compound , w hether a trainee is in uniform or 
not. 
3. Training identification cards shall not be used for any purpose other than as mentioned in paragraph 
2(1) above. 
4. Training identification cards shall be carried on the person of all trainees in uniform or plainclothes , 
whether during training or on leave of absence. 
5. Trainees must take extreme care to ensure the absolute safety and security of their identification cards 
and to preserve them against loss or damage. 
6. Where the training identification card is defaced , mutilated or damaged , such identification card must 
be immediately submitted , along with a report , in order that a new training identification card can be 
obtained. 
7. The loss of a training identification card shall be immediately reported to 
a) The Senior Ranking Police Officer of the Academy who will submit such report to the Deputy 
Commissioner ofPolice for publication in Departmental Orders . 
b) The trainee shall be re-issued with an identification card immediately after he submits this 
report . 
c) Concurrent with the submission of the report referred to at (b) above, the Senior Ranking 
Police Officer of the Academy will detail a police officer to investigate the loss and submit his 
findings. 
d) Loss of identification cards under circumstances that amount to negligence shall result in 
disciplinary action against the trainee concerned . 



49/4 
8. Whenever a trainee resigns or his training is terminated or suspended for any reason, the trainee shall 
forthwith surrender his training identification card to the Officer- in-Charge of the Police Academy or 
to anyone delegated by him. 
9. A trainee shall on the conclusion of his training at the Police Academy return the training 
identification card to the Senior Ranking Police Officer of the Academy. 
General 
Period of Training 
The period of training will be held over a 24 week period plus 8 weeks of on the job training, or as 
otherwise determined by the Commissioner. 
MESSING 
A private caterer will provide three (3) meals daily to trainees . 
All meals (breakfast , lunch and dinner) are to be consumed at the mess hall. 
Examinations 
A trainee in order to successfully complete the programme of training at the Police Academy shall obtain 
a pass in each of the academic disciplines , agility test, driJI and firearm . U nsuccessful trainees shall be 
required to pass a Supplementary Examination . Passing grades in all exams, tests , practical simulations 
and other related assessment will be set by the Provost . 
Counselling Services 
Counselling shall be provided for trainees at the Police Academy . 
Whenever trainees encounter personal problems, they can make an appointment through their respective 
supervisors to see the Social Worker. 
Trainee Allowance 
A trainee shall receive an allowance , to be called a trainee allowance , at a rate approved by the Minister 
of Finance . The Trainee Allowance shall be paid to trainees on the day immediately preceding the last 
business day ofthe month, but if the last business day falls on a Monday , the allowance shall be paid on 
the preceding Friday or the day preceding that day if the Friday is a public holiday . 
. . .15 



Attire and Appearance 
1. Code ofDress: 
(a) Female Trainees shall not: 
49/5 
PARTll 
(i) Enter any police buildings in clothing which exposes the body in a suggestive manner; 
(ii) Engage in the acts of tattooing and body piercing. 
(b) Male trainees shall not: 
(i) Enter any police building in three quarter or short pants, slippers, armless tops 
(ii) Engage in the acts of tattooing and body piercing. 
(c) Tattoos and "body piercing" shall be covered by the authorized police uniform issued by the 
Trinidad and Tobago Police Service. 
(d) Any tattoos and body piercing on the face, head, neck, hands, exposed arms and exposed legs 
are prohibited. 
(e) The code of dress for Trainees when proceeding on or returning off leave of absence is semi­
formal. 
(f) In the case of male trainees - shirt and tie or shirt jack suits, female trainees - dresses or 
appropriate suits. 
(g) Jeans are not considered appropriate in this regard. 
(h) A trainee shall always appear in the public view properly dressed, clean and smartly turned 
out, smart in his movements , and respectful in his bearing and manner. 
(i) Trainees are required to attend training sessions in uniform unless permitted to be dressed 
otherwise by the Inspector Induction Programme . 
2. Female trainees in uniform: 
(a) The hair on the head shall not be worn lower than the nape of the neck. Braids and other 
hairstyles shall be worn neatly tucked under the headdress. The hair shall be neat at all times. 
(b) Unnatural hair colours (e.g. florescent and hair bleaches) and hair decorations shall not be 
worn . 
(c) Items of jewellery and trinkets for personal adornment shall not be worn, except a wristwatch, 
and not more than two rings . A wedding ring and an engagement ring, if worn on the left 
finger will be considered as one. 
(d) Fingernails must be kept short and only natural or neutral nail polish worn. 
(e) Make-up must be simple and kept to a minimum . 
(f) When exempted from wearing regulation shoes, shall wear footwear as prescribed by the 
Police Medical Officer or an Orthopedic Specialist. 
(g) When exempted by the Police Medical Officer or the Orthopedic Specialist from wearing 
stockings, shall wear dark blue stocks . 



49/6 
3. Male trainees in uniform shall not: 
(a) In the case of male trainees the hair on the head shall be kept short and properly groomed, the 
chin and under lip clean shaven. 
(b) The shaving of the upper lip is optional. 
(c) Whiskers shaJI not be worn. Hair designs are strictly forbidden e.g. the word "Jove" etc., or 
drawing of flags, hearts, etc. 
(d) Trainees, who suffer from psychosis barbae (in-growing hair) and are exempted from shaving 
by a medical practitioner, shall have the hair on the chin and under-lip clipped as close as 
possible to the skin. 
(e) Trainees who are regularly exempted from training or some aspect of training for whatever 
reason may be examined by the police medical officer or any other medical practitioner 
competently appointed to ascertain his suitability for continuation of training 
(f) Any exemption from shaving is not to be construed as an exemption from wearing uniform. 
(g) Items of jewellery and trinkets for personal adornment shall not be worn in uniform, except a 
wristwatch, and not more than two rings. 
PARTID 
Uniform and Equipment 
l. (a) 
(b) 
(c) 
2. (a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
Uniform and equipment/accoutrements shall be issued to trainees on entry into the Police 
Academy in accordance with the directions of the Commissioner ofPolice. 
(i) Uniform and equipment/accoutrements shall be issued at the police quarter master store 
and shall bear the training number of the receiving trainee. 
(ii) Trainees shall on receipt of uniform and equipment/accoutrements sign the register 
kept at the police stores for that purpose. 
(iii) The uniform worn by the trainee shall carry a coloured badge marked "trainee" on the 
right epaulette. 
The Commissioner of Police shall provide each trainee with a training manual in each of the 
subject areas taught at the Police Academy and any other related manuals or texts required to 
complete the course of training to become a police officer. 
The kit book shall be issued in duplicate and shall bear the training number of trainee 
concerned. 
The original kit book shall be kept at the police stores. 
Where it is not expedient for each trainee to possess a duplicate kit book at least the original 
shall be issued and kept at the police stores. 
All entries in the kit book shall be made by the storekeeper and signed by the trainee receiving 
the kit. Erasures shall not be made. All corrections made by the storekeeper in the kit book 
shall be initialed by him. 



49/7 
3. Items of kit issued to a trainee shall be maintained in a serviceable condition and secured against loss 
and/or damage. 
4. (a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
5. (a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
6. (a) 
The trainee whose kit has been lost, destroyed, damaged or rendered unserviceable, shall 
submit a written report to the Senior Ranking Police Officer of the Academy. 
The Senior Ranking Police Officer of the Academy shall submit the report with his 
recommendations to the officer-in -charge of "Finance Branch" to have such item of kit 
replaced. 
The Officer -in-Charge ''Finance Branch" on receipt of such recommendation and report from 
the Senior Ranking Police Officer of the Academy shall make arrangements to have the items 
of kit replaced and such loss subsequently published in the Departmental Orders. 
If in the opinion of the Senior Ranking Police Officer of the Academy the loss, destruction or 
damage has been considered negligent , he may direct that an investigation to be conducted. 
Whenever a trainee resigns, or his training is terminated or suspended for any reason, items of 
kit issued to him shall be returned to the Police Stores within seven (7) days of his departure. 
In the case of abandonment or death of a trainee the Senior Ranking Police Officer of the 
Academy or someone designated by him shall retrieve all items of kit from the trainee's 
quarters and/or residence within seven (7) days. 
The receiving officer shall issue a receipt in duplicate to the person from whom items of kit are 
retrieved. 
The original receipt shall be handed over to the person from whom such kit was received. 
(i) The receiving officer shall return within seven (7) days of retrieving the items referred to at 
paragraph (a) such items and duplicate of the receipt to the Police Stores . 
(ii) In all cases of the above, the Senior Ranking Police Officer of the Academy shall ensure 
that all items of kit received under his command are returned to the police stores. 
It shall be the duty of First Division officers and Inspectors attached to the Police Academy to 
carry out kit inspections by making a physical check of all items of kit issued to trainees. At 
such inspections , the inspecting officer must ensure that: 
(i) Items ofkit are in a serviceable condition. 
(ii) The items of kit presented are in agreement with the entries made in the kit book 
(where the duplicate kit book is available). 
(iii) If there are any items of kit unaccounted for, an explanation must be given for their 
unavailability. 
(iv) The duplicate kit book of trainees present at kit inspection shall be made available to 
the inspecting officer , so that the items of kit agree with the entries in the kit book. 
(b) Upon completion of the kit inspection, the inspecting officer shall investigate any discrepancy, 
which may be found and may initiate disciplinary proceedings against the defaulting trainee if 
the circumstances warrant. 



49/8 
(c) The inspecting officer shall submit a report to the head of the Finance Branch through the 
Senior Ranking Police Officer of the Academy requesting replacement in cases where this 
becomes necessary. 
(d) Kit inspection for trainees shall be held at least once every quarter at the police academy. 
Inspection 
In an effort to ensure that a high standard of appearance and turnout is maintained, inspections of 
personnel and dormitories will be conducted frequently. 
The Senior Ranking Police Officer of the Academy or his nominee will carry out a general inspection of 
personnel, dormitories and surroundings twice per months or as directed. 
Unless otherwise directed by the Senior Ranking Police Officer of the Academy, inspection of trainees 
and dormitories will be carries out daily by Inspector Induction Programme or his nominee. 
Trainees shall clean and prepare their dormitories for daily inspection. Plain clothes must be locked away; 
civilian shoes must be cleaned and placed under cots properly aligned. Instructors will visit daily to see 
that a high standard is maintained. 
Leave of Absence 
Trainees will be granted two (2) night passes per week and at least two (2) weekend leave passes (6:00 
pm Friday to 6:00am Monday) per month, after the initial period of four (4) weeks. 
1. No Trainees shall proceed on leave of absence except such leave is authorized. 
2. Trainees desirous of obtaining leave must submit an application in writing to the Inspector Induction 
Programme as follows: 
(i) In the case of Male Trainees via his Squad Commander at least two (2) days before 
commencement of such leave and; 
(ii) In the case of Female Trainees via the Female Supervisor at least two (2) days before the 
commencement of such leave. 
Emergency Short Leave between the hours of 4:00pm and 8:00am will be dealt with by the duty 
S.D.O. 
PART IV 
Sick Leave 
I. The Senior Ranking Police Officer ofthe Academy shall keep and maintain the following registers. 
(a) Trainee Sick Leave Register which shall contain: 
(i) the name of the trainee 
(ii) the amount of visits by the trainee to the doctor 
(iii) the squad to which the trainee is assigned 
(iv) the nature of illness suffered by the trainee 
. ..19 



49/9 
(v) the nature of the treatment 
(vi) the exemptions given by the Police Medical Officer and other registered medical 
practitioners. 
2. If there is a cause for a Trainee to report sick whilst on leave, he/she should do so at the nearest Police 
Station/Post and inform the Senior Ranking Police Officer of the Academy, in person or by phone. 
Additionally, he shall visit the Police Medical Officer , the next working day. 
3. The procedure relating to sick leave is outlined as follows: 
A Trainee applying for sick leave is required to tender his application, either: 
(a) in person; or 
(b) by a bearer 
Trainees tendering application in person 
A trainee tendering an application for sick leave in person shall: 
(a) report his arrival to the Charge Room Sentry; 
(b) record his arrival and the fact that he has tendered an application in his Pocket Diary; 
(c) obtain a signature in his Pocket diary from the Charge Room Sentry/Second Division Officer in­
charge of the Charge Room; 
(d) sign the "Sick Leave Application Receipt Register'' . 
Trainees tendering application by a bearer 
Whenever a trainee tenders an application for sick leave by a bearer, be shall: 
(a) advise the bearer that upon delivery for application he should sign the "Sick Leave Application 
Receipt Register'' and obtain a receipt from the Charge Room Sentry/Second Division Officer-in­
charge of the Charge Room receiving it; 
(b) Obtain the receipt mentioned at paragraph (a) above from the bearer to be presented if and when 
required by an officer senior in rank to him. 
The Second Division Officer at a Station/Post who receives an application for sick leave shaiJ: 
(a) record the arrival and departure of the person tendering the application, 
(b) request a signature from the person tendering the application in the "Sick Leave Application 
Receipt Register", 
(c) where the applicant tenders in person, initial his Pocket Diary; 
(d) in the case where a person other than the applicant tenders, issue him with a receipt in accordance 
with the specimen show at Appendix "E" and inform him to deliver it as soon as possible to the 
applicant; 
.. ./10 



49/ 10 
(e) send a telephone/wireless message to the Second Division Officer-in -charge of the 
Station/Office/Section where the applicant is attached informing him of the contents of the sick 
leave application; 
(f) deliver the sick leave application to the Second Division Officer-in-charge of the Charge Room 
and inform him of the action taken in connection with the application . 
The Second Division Officer-in- charge of the Charge Room, on receipt of a sick leave application, 
shall: 
(a) forward the application immediately with a Minute to the First Division Officer- in-charge of the 
Division/Branch/Section/Unit, to which the officer is attached, indicating the following: 
(i) the date and time the application was tendered; 
(ii) by whom tendered; 
(iii) whether the Second Division Officer-in-charge of the Station/Office to which the applicant 
is attached was informed; 
Physi cal Fitness 
1. Where a trainee whose level of physical fitness does not allow him to adequately participate in the 
training. the Commissioner ofPolice may direct him to submit himself for a medical examination by a 
Government Medical officer. 
Exemption Due To Medica l Condi tion 
I. A trainee who is certified by a Registered Medical Practitioner to be suffering from a medical 
condition and recommended for an exemption shall submit an application with the medical certificate 
to Senior Ranking Police Officer ofthe Academy . 
2. where the exemption granted to a trainee is in excess of ninety (90) consecutive days, on the 
expiration of the first ninety (90) days and every successive ninety (90) days thereafter, he shall revisit 
the attending physician, in order to have his medical condition reviewed and obtain certification of his 
present condition. 
3. (a) Whenever it is necessary to ascertain whether or not a trainee should be discharged on grounds of 
ill health, he shall be examined by the Police Medical Officer. 
(b) A trainee, who is on a prolonged period of illness or has been examined by a governme nt Medical 
officer based on the recommendations ofthe commissioner of Police and certified to be ill, where 
such illness affects the performance of his training shall be placed before the Police Medical 
Officer on the recommendations of the Commissioner of Police. 
(c) A trainee who is directed by the Commissioner of Police to undergo a medical examination by a 
medical board must attend at the time and place mentioned in the directive . 
. . ./11 



49111 
Pregnant Trainee 
1. A trainee who has become pregnant during the course of her induction training shall be required to 
report the fact of her pregnancy to the Officer in Charge of the Police Academy. 
2. Where a report of pregnancy has been made the trainee shall be required to discontinue training 
immediately upon receipt of the report of her pregnancy and shall no longer be regarded as a trainee. 
3. The Commissioner ofPolice may again appoint as a trainee, a female who was required to discontinue 
training on the grounds of pregnancy. 
4. In the exercise of his discretion under paragraph 3, the Commissioner ofPolice shall consider: 
(i) Whether the female has been deemed medically fit to undergo training; 
(ii) The results of recent background and character checks; 
(iii) The general conduct and performance of the female during her initial period of training; 
(iv) Whether her re-appointment as a trainee would be to the detriment of any other person 
awaiting appointment as a trainee; 
(v) The contents of the existing training programme and whether, based upon the period initially 
spent as a trainee, the female should be required to re-enter training from the beginning of the 
training programme or from a later stage; 
(vi) The length oftime which has elapsed since the discontinuance ofher initial period of training. 
Trainee With Special Circumstance 
1. (a) The Commissioner of Police may, where a trainee is seriously injured, or develops or exhibits a 
serious medical condition to the extent that he cannot reasonably be expected to cope with the 
rigours and requirements of training, require that his status as a trainee be discontinued. 
(b) Where a trainee's status has been discontinued under sub-regulation l(a), he shall no longer be 
regarded as a trainee. 
(c) The Commissioner of Police may again appoint as a trainee, a person whose training was 
discontinued due to injury or the existence of a serious medical condition, provided that the person 
has been deemed medically fit to undergo training. 
(d) In the exercise of his discretion under sub-regulation 1 (c), the Commissioner of Police shall 
consider: 
(i) The results of recent background and character checks; 
(ii) The general conduct and performance of the person during his initial period of training; 
(iii) Whether his re-appointment as a trainee would be to the detriment of any other person 
awaiting appointment as a trainee; 
(iv) The contents of the existing training programme and whether, based upon the period 
initially spent as a trainee, the person should be required to re-enter training from the 
beginning of the training programme or from a later stage; 
(v) The length of time which has elapsed since the discontinuance of his initial period of 
training. 



49/12 
2. (a) The Commissioner of Police may, where a trainee is experiencing a circumstance of a private 
personal nature which has a debilitating effect upon his emotional and psychological well being to 
the extent that he cannot reasonably be expected to cope with the rigours and requirements of 
training, discontinue his status as a trainee for up to six months . 
(b) The Commissioner ofPolice shall not exercise his discretion under sub-regulation 2(a) unless the 
trainee has made a written request to have his status as a trainee discontinued. 
(c) Where a trainee 's status has been discontinued under sub-regulation 2(a), he shall, during the 
period of discontinuance , no longer be regarded as a trainee. 
(d) The Commissioner of Police shall, when re-appointing a person whose status was discontinued 
under sub-regulation 2(a), consider : 
(i) Whether his re-appointment as a trainee would be to the detriment of any other person 
awaiting appointment as a trainee ; 
(ii) The contents of the existing training programme and whether, based upon the period 
initially spent as a trainee, the person should be required to reenter training from the 
beginning of the training programme or from a later stage; 
(iii) The length of time which has elapsed since the discontinuance of his initial period of 
training . 
Squadron Leaders:- Selection of: 
The senior persons in each squad are selected by virtue oftheir positions on the Merit List. They will be 
identified by wearing two (2) identification badges on the left epaulette . They are required to know the 
location of all members of their Squad at all times. 
Trainees are expected to be at their assigned locations at all times . It is the duty of each one to advise the 
senior person if he/she is to be absent from an assigned location at anytime. 
Trainees are not allowed to leave the training compound without the knowledge of the Duty 
Second Division Officer. 
Compound Patrols 
Trainees will be required to perform compound patrols as detailed by the Senior Ranking Police Officer 
of the Academy. 
Punctuality 
Trainees are required to be punctual for classes, parades and when reporting off leave of absence . 
Smoking Policy 
Smoking is prohibited on the compound of the Academy. 
Cell Phones 
The use of all cell phones is prohibited between 8:00am to 4:00 pm. 
Under no circumstances , shall a trainee have in his possession cell phones in class sessions, parades and 
meetings. 
. . ./13 



49/13 
Noise 
The loud playing of musical instruments or music is prohibited in the dormitories and compound of the 
police academy by trainees. 
Gambling 
Gambling in the Police Academy is strictly prohibited. 
Lounging 
Lounging or sitting on steps accessing the dormitory building or other buildings in the Police Academy is 
prohibited. 
Lights Out 
Lights out in the trainee dormitories will be at I O:OOpm sharp daily. 
Restricted Movement 
Between the hours of 7:00pm and 10:00 pm trainees movement will be restricted to their dormitories , the 
mess hall and the laundry, unless explicit permission has been granted by the Duty Officer and/or Female 
Supervisor. 
Parades 
The workday begins at 5:30am. Trainees will rise, tidy their dormitories, have their ablutions and fall in 
as directed for fatigue parade. Further, trainees will fall in on all other parades as directed . 
Other Matters Of Significance 
1. Access shall be restricted to the following areas: 
(a) The Officers and Trainers Quarters, 
(b) The Armoury I Armour shop, 
(c) The offices Operational Departments I Units 
(d) The Female Dormitory shall be out of bounds to aH male officers. 
Etiquette 
3. All Senior Police Officers and Trainers must be addressed or referred to as "Sir" or "M' aam /Madam" 
at all times. 
Words like "Good Morning', "Good Evening", "Please", "Thank You", "Excuse Me" indicate 
politeness and should be practiced. 
When speaking, they should stand at attention. 
4. Fire Emergency escapes shall not be used except in cases ofEmergency. 
5. All disciplinary matters shall be reported to the Inspector Induction Programme who will take action 
as he sees fit. 



49/14 
6. Absence from duty - except where permission is granted by Inspector Induction Programme. No 
trainees shall be absent from any activity related to the Police Academy Induction training program. 
7. Alcohol Consumption - the consumption of alcoholic beverage by Trainees is "NOT' permitted 
anywhere in the Academy. However, during special events the Senior Ranking Police Officer of the 
Academy may relax such restrictions. 
8. Trainees are expected to conduct themselves in a manner attributed to the Office of a Police Officer. 
PARTV 
Trinidad and Tobago Police Service 
Code of Conduct 
The nature and functions of the Police Service in defence of Public Order require that the manner in 
which duties are exercised is consistent since there is a direct impact on the quality of life of the 
individual and society as a whole. 
More importantly, there must be the inspiration to perform these duties diligently and with the dignity that 
affords the quality of service which the Police Service is capable of and is borne out by our motto: "TO 
PROTECT AND SERVE WITH PRIDE". 
1. It shall be the duty of all Police Officers to: 
(a) Prevent and detect crime and other infractions of the law; 
(b) Keep the peace; 
(c) Assuage fear of crime and disorder and, wherever possible, to enlist the help of our fellow citizens 
in achieving these ends. 
2. ln the performance of these duties, Police Officers must uphold the fundamental rights and freedoms 
enshrined in our Constitution by sustaining wholeheartedly: 
(a) the right to free speech; 
(b) the right to free association; 
(c) the right of access to legal advice; 
(d) the right to silence; 
(e) the presumption of innocence. 
2. Police Officers are required to be reasonable when acting on suspicion. They must therefore adhere to 
the principles pertaining to the rights of suspects, powers of arrest and detention. 
3. Police Officers are required to exercise integrity in the collection and presentation of evidence. 
4. Police Officers, with consummate skill, must use no more force than is necessary to accomplish a 
legitimate purpose. 
. . ./15 



49/15 
5. Police Officers must at all times be the standard bearers of the Police Service. Thus, they must: 
(a) show compassionate respect for the dignity of individuals, 
(b) treat every person of whatever social position, race or creed with equality, courtesy and 
understanding; 
(c) befriend and assist the citizen by giving sympathetic guidance and comfort to persons in distress; 
(d) demonstrate staunch leadership when the public is faced with uncertainty and disaster. 
6. Police Officers shall ensure as far as practicable the full preservation of the health of persons in their 
custody and, in particular, shall take immediate steps to secure medical attention for such persons 
whenever required. 
7. Police Officers shall not engage themselves in any act of corruption and, shall also rigourously oppose 
and combat all such acts. 
8. Police Officers must act always for the public good, as a helpful and reasonable Public Officer and not 
merely as enforcers of the law. 
9. Police Officers shall not disclose matters of a confidential nature that may come to their knowledge or 
be in their possession unless the performance of their duties or the need of justice require otherwise. 
10. Police Officers must show respect for their senior officers and senior officers must respect, and show 
compassion for their juniors . 
11. Police Officers must be prudent and restrained; having full regard to what is practicable, particularly 
when off duty. 
12. Police Officers, whether on or off duty, shall not appear in public under the influence of drink or drug 
so as to render themselves capable oftarnishing the image of the Police Service. 
13. Police Officers shall guard the good reputation of the Police Service by: 
(a) working assiduously to maintain its high ideals; 
(b) encouraging other officers to do so by good example and positive leadership; 
(c) contributing to its excellence by showing resolution and honesty effaced with police malpractice. 
14. Police Officers shall record and respond to all reports made to them weighing all the surrounding 
factors judging these in light of their duty to see that justice is done. 
15. Police Officers must be and be seen to be unfettered by obligation, deciding each issue without fear, 
favour, affection, malice or ill wi11. 
.. ./16 



49/16 
16. Police Officers must approach their duties with the professional competence which their office 
require, thus, they shall: 
(a) avoid being late for duty; 
(b) be cleanly and smartly dressed at all times; 
(c) take pride in and care for all accruements entrnsted to them for the proper and efficient 
pe~formance of their duties; 
(d) when in uniform must not smoke in view of the public. 
17. Police Officers shall respect the law and this Code, they shall to the best oftheir capabilities, take the 
necessary steps to prevent and oppose any violation of wither. 
18. Where any Police Officer has reason to believe that a violation of this Code has occurred or is about to 
occur, such officer shall report the matter to his immediate senior who shall take the necessary steps to 
ensure that the violator is dealt with accordingly. 
19. Above all, Police Officers must be prompt when conducting investigations and so avoid unnecessary 
delays. They must therefore, inform complainants of the progress of investigations into their 
complaints. They must also heed adverse public comments on police assistance so as to be guided as 
to the quality of service provided. 
20. Police officers must not be engaged in the consumption of alcoholic beverages and or smoking 
cigarettes whilst on duty. 
PART VI 
Inappropriate Conduct Policy 
The Trinidad and Tobago Police Service is committed to creating and maintaining an environment free of 
inappropriate conduct. Every member of the service should be aware that the police service does not 
tolerate inappropriate conduct and that such conduct is prohibited. This policy prohibits inappropriate 
conduct by F.D.Os, S.D.Os, civilian employees of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and trainees. 
The Trinidad and Tobago Police Service will take prompt and appropriate action to prevent, eliminate and 
if necessary, discipline conduct that violates this policy. All employees of the Trinidad and Tobago Police 
Service are responsible for participating in the creation of a work and training environment free from 
inappropriate conduct. 
To accomplish these goals, the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service policy on inappropriate behavior shall 
be clearly and regularly communicated to employees attached to the Police Academy, both supervisory 
and non supervisory through educational programs and training. 
In addition, copies of this policy shall be circulated throughout the seTVJce when trainees are on 
assignments outside of the Police Academy. 
All trainees in the Trinidad and Tobago Police Academy are entitled to be trained in an environment free 
from inappropriate conduct. 
The Trinidad and Tobago Police Service is committed to preventing and eliminating such misconduct in 
the work place before it arises to the level of harassment . 
.. ./17 



49/17 
Policy Purpose- Statement of Prohibited Conduct 
It is the intent of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service to prevent inappropriate conduct from escalating 
to the point that a hostile work and training environment exists. To that end the following is considered 
inappropriate conduct and is prohibited in the workplace regardless of where training is being carried on: 
);> Verbal abuse of a sexual nature; 
);> Unwelcome, offensive sexual flirtation; 
);> Unwelcome, graphic comments about an individual's body; 
);> Sexually degrading words to describe an individual ; 
);> Sexually explicit gestures ; 
);> Unwelcome inquiry or comment about sexual conduct or sexual orientation or preferences; 
);> Verbal abuse consistently targeted at only one sex, even if the content ofthe abuse is not sexual; 
);> Unwelcome brushing, touching, patting or pinching an individual's body; 
);> The display in the Police Academy of sexually suggestive, sexually demeaning or pornographic 
objects, pictures, posters or cartoons; 
Any supervisor who threatens or suggests, either explicitly or implicitly, that a trainee's refusal to submit 
to sexual advances or other conduct of a sexual nature will adversely affect the trainee's training or 
working conditions has engaged in inappropriate conduct . 
Procedures for Making Investigation and Resolving Inappropriate Conduct and Retaliation 
Complaints 
A. Complaints 
Complaints of inappropriate conduct or of retaliation for making such complaints shall be made in writing 
or verbally to the Senior Ranking Police Officer of the Academy or the Provost who shall then refer the 
complaint to the Complaints Division. 
If the trainee's supervisor is involved in the alleged harassment, the trainee may submit the complaint to 
the next supervisor, in their direct chain of command, who shall be responsible for transmitting any 
complaints received to the Senior Ranking Police Officer of the Academy. 
The Senior Ranking Police Officer of the Academy shall then assign, as appropriate, one or two 
investigators. If only one investigator is assigned, the investigator shall be from the Complaints Division. 
No trainee shall be required to file a complaint with a supervisor hostile to that trainee and/or who 
engages in conduct or has been alleged to have engaged in conduct which could be considered 
inappropriate conduct . 
Where a supervisor has knowledge that inappropriate conduct or retaliation against another person has 
been reported she/he shall be required to report such inappropriate conduct or retaliation to the Senior 
Ranking Police Officer of the Academy. Failure to report shall conduct may result in disciplinary action 
taken against the supervisor. 
During the pending investigation, the Senior Ranking Police Officer of the Academy in consultation with 
the Head of the Complaints Division, shall promptly take such action as is reasonably calculated to 
prevent further conduct/harassment occurring. 
. . ./18 



49118 
B. Investigations - Confidentiality 
All complaints shall be investigated with thoroughness and as expeditiously as possible by the 
investigator( s ). 
Investigations shall be conducted with particular care to preserve the confidentiality of all persons 
involved. Only those who need to know in order to accomplish the purposes of the investigation shall be 
provided with the identity of the complainant and the allegations. 
All parties including the complainant and the alleged harasser contacted in the course of an investigation 
shall be advised of the necessity of confidentiality and that any breach of confidentiality shall be treated 
as misconduct subject to disciplinary action. 
Copies of the investigators final report shall be submitted to the Senior Ranking Police Officer of the 
Academy who shall share it with the Provost. 
The complainant and the alleged harasser shall be advised of the findings reached on the complaint. If a 
violation of this policy is found to have occurred, the complainant will be advised that appropriate 
disciplinary action will be taken in accordance with the Police Service Regulations, 2007. 
All individuals are required to be truthful forthcoming, and co-operative with the complaint 
investigations. An investigation shall begin promptly. The investigator(s) shall provide the Senior 
Ranking Police Officer of the Academy with progress report every thirty (30) days. Upon completion, a 
written report shall be prepared and submitted to the Head of the Complaints Division who will share it 
with the Provost of the Police Academy. 
The Head of the Complaints Division and the Senior Ranking Police Officer of the Academy shall review 
the report and make a determination as to whether or not disciplinary or corrective action is warranted. An 
appeal may lie to the Commissioner of Police . 
C. Good Faith Allegations 
Because of the nature of inappropriate conduct allegation often cannot be substantiated by direct evidence 
other than the complaining party's own statement. Lack of corroborating evidence should not discourage 
trainees from seeking relief. No action shall be taken against a trainee who makes a good faith allegation 
of inappropriate conduct, even if after investigation, the allegation is not substantiated . 
However, allegations or statements made in the course of an investigation found to be intentionally 
dishonest or made with willful disregard for the truth may result in the termination of the trainees training. 
D. Retaliation Prohibited 
Retaliation of any kind against anyone who is involved in the investigation of or in making an allegation 
of inappropriate conduct is prohibited. Allegations of retaliation will be investigated and if substantiated 
shall result in disciplinary action against the retaliator(s) up to and including termination from 
employment. 
. .. /19 



Security 
49119 
PART VII 
1. Trainees must report their departure from, and their arrival at, the Police Academy to the diary sentry 
at the Guardroom. 
2. Trainees are not to indulge in conversation with police officers or trainees on sentry or patrol duty on 
the compound except on a point of duty in which case, it should be brief 
3. Trainees are allowed visitors between the hours of 4:00pm and 6:00pm, Monday to Friday and from 
2:00 pm to 6:00 pm on weekends and Public Holidays or other periods as determined by the Senior 
Ranking Police Officer of the Academy. 
4. Visitors to trainees must be escorted to the designated visitor reception area. 
Offences Against Discipline 
1. Absent without leave or being late for parade 
2. Breach ofPolice Academy Rules 
3. Damage to clothing or other articles of kit supplied 
4. Breach of Inappropriate Conduct Policy 
5. Drunkenness 
6. Insubordination 
7. Neglect of duty 
8. Uncleanliness 
9. Cheating at examination 
All disciplinary matters will be reported to the Inspector Induction Programme who will take action as he 
sees fit. 
Resignation 
Any trainee resigning from the Academy must submit a letter of resignation addressed to the 
Commissioner of Police through the Inspector Induction Programme and is required to see a Senior 
Ranking Police Officer of the Academy or in their absence, their delegate. 
On the said day of any trainee leaving the Police Academy a letter of resignation shall be submitted to the 
Commissioner with a final report from the Senior Ranking Police Officer of the Academy indicating: 
(a) Reason for leaving the Police academy 
(b) Character of trainee 
(c) Conduct of trainee 
(d) Manner in which the trainee performed during training. 