No . 44 
Police Orders by Mr. James Philbert 
Commissioner ofPolice 
Police Administration Building 
Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets 
Port of Spain 
Tuesday ih April 2009 
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian 
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press) 
Departmental Order PART I-NIL 
PART-II 
STRICTER CONTROL AND MANAGEMENT WHEN ISSUING GASOLINE 
CHITBOOKS TO POLICE OFFICERS 
1. INFORMATION 
The caption referred to above points to serious observations made by External Auditors 
upon examination of the Financial Records in the Police Department. The Auditors 
discovered that there were clear infractions where on several occasions, payments were 
made to a provider for fuel and lubricants supplied to vehicles that were either not 
owned by the Police Service or were no longer in the service. 
2 INTENTION 
As Commissioner of Police and being responsible for financial accountability of the 
Police Service, I view the report before me unacceptable and a distinct reflection of the 
level of control and management Division, Branch and Unit Commanders have on the 
system. The intention of this order therefore, is to make Commanders more aware of 
their delegated responsibility and simultaneously ensure that steps are taken to 
eliminate the irregularities reported, thus creating an efficient and effective system 
which is well controlled and managed. 
3 STRATEGIES 
• With immediate effect, Divisional I Branch/ Unit Commanders are to delegate a 
First Division Officer to take responsibility for the collection, distribution and 
storage of Gasoline Chit-books issued to Police Officers/ Drivers of Police Vehicles. 
• The First Division Officer must ensure that the Gasoline Chit book register is 
properly signed by the Officer j Driver and his/ her regimental number affixed. 
This register must be kept in the Charge Room and made available for Inspection by 
visiting Officers and the Internal and External Auditors. 



44/2 
• The First Division Officer must ensure that the Officer when signing the Gasoline 
Chit, also insert his I her name in block letters along with regimental number and 
vehicle number, upon presentation to the Gas Station attendant. The Officer must be 
instructed to present his Police ID Card to the Gas Station attendant before any Gas 
is supplied to the Police Vehicle. 
4. COMMUNICATION 
In view of the above strategies which must be implemented, it is instructive therefore 
that Divisional/ Branch and Unit Commanders bring this order to the attention of their 
charges when engaged in lecture sessions. 
PART III - NIL 
cf.i/£~li~ ~ 