2) Police Orders by

Prey Commissioner of Police

aK 'olice Administration Building

FS or. Edward & Sackville Streets
a Port of Spain
P Proper ano Tuesday 17" March, 2020
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
a ee
No. 56 Departmental Order PART I
PART II
Reproduced hereunder is a letter from the Bailiff Committee in the Ministry of the
Attorney General

February 3, 2020
Gary Griffith
Commissioner of Police
Office of the Commissioner of Police
Police Administration Building
Corner Sackville and Edward Street
Port of Spain
Dear Commissioner,
Implementation of section 5(3)(d) Bailiff Act, Chap 4:61 — Private Bailiff Intake Exercise
The subject caption refers. :
On behalf of the Honourable Attorney General, I wish to inform you of the following;

1. The Ministry of the Attorney General and Legal Affairs will commence the Private Bailiff

Intake Exercise in February, 2020 with the publication of an advertisement inviting suitable
persons to submit their interest to be interviewed and examined.
Section 5(3) of the Bailiff Act, provides the Registrar of the Supreme Court with the power to
license an individual as a bailiff, once certain criteria are met. Section 5(3)(d), in particular,
establishes special criteria for private bailiff licensing and impliedly places a statutory
mandate upon the Ministry. The mandate is to interview and examine suitable persons, hence
the advertisement.

2. Asa matter of policy, any public officer including Police Officers, Special Reserve Police
(fulltime and part-time) and Municipal Police cannot participate in the exercise
(emphasis ours). The principal reasons are two fold and concerns the likely impact upon the
duties and availability of Police Officers to the state. Private Bailiffs-

(a) Operate during working hours and lawfully execute bailiff functions between the
hours 6:00am to 6:00pm, Monday to Saturday, and
tia ;


--- page break ---

(b) May from time to time lawfully seek the assistance of the police to maintain the
peace.
I refer you to paragraphs 19 and 23 of the Code of Conduct, made further to Regulations 12 of
the Bailiffs Regulations, 2001. For your convenience, I have enclosed a copy of the Act and its
Regulations.
Paula Ann Cross-Horton
Chairman, Bailiff Committee
PART Il — NIL
Commissioner of Police
