No. 59 
Information : 
Police Orders by Mr. D. Gibbs 
Commissioner of Police 
Police Administration Building 
Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets 
Port of Spain 
Monday 21"' March 2011 
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian 
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press) 
Departmental Order PART I -NIL 
PART li 
Divisional Handling of Notices of Suspensions/Interdiction 
From time to time the assistance ofHeads of Divisions is sought by the Human Resource Branch 
in the serving of Suspension or Interdiction Notices to Police Officers so concerned. However , 
over time, marked tardines s has been observed whereby some Divisions are failing to comply 
with the accompanying instructions and deadline dates given for the return of service of such 
Notices . 
Intention: 
By this Order, it is envisaged that Divisional Commanders will revisit the critical importance of 
prompt service and immediatereturn of these Notices to the Commissioner of Police as they 
affect the effectiveness of the administrative and financial processes associated with the 
Suspension or Interdiction of a Police Officer. 
Administration : 
1. The instructions to Heads of Divisions accompanying such Notices are explicit and must 
be followed in its strictest sense and interpretation . In instances where there are delays 
associated with locating an officer at the stipulated address, the Commissioner of Police 
must be notified accordingly. Protection from loss is of paramount importance and on no 
account are Notices to be retained by Divisions for unduly lengthy periods of time . 
Particular importance must be placed on the instruction for the officer to report once per 
month by instituting a Register for signing and countersigning . 
... .. ./2 



59/2 
Administration Confd : 
2. At every instance of a Police Officer being brought before a Court, a report outlining the 
circumstances including the Complainant and next date of hearing if any, shall 
immediately be forwarded to the Commissioner of Police .Further , as a reminder , all 
Divisions shall promptly report in writing all postponement dates and or outcomes of all 
Court proceedings where Police Officers have appeared as defendants I accused and 
furnish a certified copy of the Extract of the Magistrate 's Case Book accordingly. To 
assist in this regard. Police Officers before the Courts shall henceforth be required to 
report to the designated First Division Officer within two (2) days after hearings to 
provide updates. The latter will go a long way in tightening the processes involved. 
3. Particular attention must be paid to the seizure of the Police Identification Card and must 
be done upon service of the Notice. As soon as practicable thereafter , efforts must be 
made to seize all other items of kit from wherever they may be stored and return same to 
the Police Quartermaster Stores. In this regard, a kit list of accoutrements issued will 
accompany the Notice. Therefore, any unaccounted items should be investigated and a 
comprehensive report forwarded to the Commissioner of Police with the return of 
servtce. 
4. Heads of Divisions and Branches are reminded to exerctse their full authority in 
pursuance of service and seizure. 
Authority : 
Section 152 and 153 of the Police Service Regulations , 2007 . 
PART Ill -NIL 
C ( ~f 1· ommiSSioner o Po tee 