Ks) Police Orders by Gary Griffith
| FAN Commissioner of Police
eK ; Police Administration Building
QE :
WW? eh Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
——— < Port of Spain
Pemorecr ane Thursday 12" March, 2020
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian employees
of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
No. 52 Departmental Order PART I - NIL
PART II
i ESTABLISHMENT
The Cyber and Social Media Unit (CSMU) formally the “Cyber Crime Unit” as per Departmental
Order # 203/09 is established to assist all investigators of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service with
technology-based investigations. The unit was designed to operate as an Intelligence gathering tool whilst
also providing investigators with an analytical approach to all investigations.
2: CLASSIFICATION
The CYBER & SOCIAL MEDIA UNIT should be classified as a Class 1 Specialist Unit. This
classification is in line with the overall remit of the units’ strategic objectives. The unit’s expertise
requires it to provide technological services to the entire Trinidad and Tobago Police Service. Personnel
assigned to the C.S.M.U will be required to undergo specialized digital forensic training and be
: continuously assessed against the unit’s core competencies.
. 3. INTENTION
In keeping with the T.T.P.S Strategic Plan for 2019-2021 which highlights intelligence-led, evidence-
based and technologically driven solutions to crime detection and prevention as a key pathway in
achieving the organizations desire to become a world-class establishment. This unit has been now given
| additional responsibilities as it pertains to online investigations and surveillance as a crime fighting tool.
The use of social media by police organizations falls into two broad categories: communication (or
engagement) and investigation (or operational use). Criminals are utilizing social media to cover illegal
| activities and are becoming more sophisticated in their approaches to crime using Facebook, Instagram
and Twitter (George 2019). Therefore, the new social media component of the unit will form a major
part of the re-structuring platform in order to provide real time responses to social media investigations.
4, ADMINISTRATIVE STRUCTURE
: The Cyber & Social Media Unit is established to assist all investigators of the Trinidad and Tobago
Police Service with technology-based investigations. The unit is structured into a tier system in order to
meet strategic multiple objectives.
ee
me aa a se a = = _ _" “


--- page break ---

52/2
Tier 1 Performs advanced forensic analysis. Personnel at the Cyber and Social Media Unit will provide
advanced mobile and computer forensic examinations. and serves as an escalation step for Tier 1, when
advanced forensic analysis is required.
Tier 2 Performs triage and basic analysis as first responders. Additionally, personnel will perform
intermediate recovery and analysis capabilities. The Cyber & Social Media Unit will deliver overall
support to each division and section within the TTPS. Moreover, Tier 2’s responsibility will include
online investigations inclusive of social media investigations. This rapid examination capability allows
personnel to quickly determine the next appropriate action which may include arrest, release, intelligence
analysis or referral to a higher tier for deeper forensic analysis.
The concept of a tiered system is designed to establish a coordinated framework within the unit with a
focus on fluid response times when handling the forensic process of extraction of computer and mobile
devices. In this operational model, forensic operations occur organization-wide along clearly defined
roles with specific skillsets and tools. The Cyber & Social Media Unit framework is enabled to create
expanded forensic processing capacity as well as faster, more efficient results for cases.
|
4.1 TIER1 ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
| e Attempt to extract locked, secured and/or encrypted mobile devices and other storage
media connected to the mobile and computer devices.
e Perform advanced analysis and reporting of forensic extraction evidence.
e Obtain advanced training and certification on multiple tools and techniques.
e Continue assigned training, examinations and pursue continuing digital forensics analyst
training.
!
e Online investigations inclusive of social media enquiries.
Recommended Qualifications:
e Tertiary Education or equivalent.
e A minimum of eighty (80) hours of advanced digital forensic training.
: e Degree or Certification in the specialty.
: e Knowledge in the use of the examination equipment, software, and the procedures used
in conducting examinations.
4.2 TIER 2 ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
At the Tier 2 level the examiner is a first responder. A first responder is a police officer or
investigator who is trained in mobile and computer forensics
The first responder’s responsibilities include, but are not limited to:
e Identifying, seizing, and securing mobile device evidence and all associated cables,
chargers, Bluetooth-connected items at the scene.
POS:


--- page break ---

52/3
e Documenting the scene as well as the status and the specific location of the mobile device
evidence recovered at the crime scene.
e Collecting, labelling, and preserving the mobile device evidence.
e Packaging and transporting digital evidence in a secure manner, using a faraday container,
approved Radio Frequency (RF) isolation faraday packaging or material.
e Using approved and accredited mobile forensic programs and tools to perform basic
mobile device data extraction.
e Performing analysis and reporting of mobile device evidence.
e Obtaining continual training and certification on multiple mobile forensics tools and
techniques. ‘
e Conduct online investigations.
e Closed Circuit Television (C.C.T.V) investigations.
Recommended Qualifications:
e Training in law enforcement
e A minimum of forty (40) hours of professional training in the identification and seizure
of mobile device evidence and basic data extractions.
e A minimum of forty (40) hours of professional training in the examination and reporting
of mobile device data. : .
e A minimum of forty (40) hours of professional training in online investigations.
4.3 CYBER AND SOCIAL MEDIA UNIT LAB MANAGEMENT
I. Lead Senior Investigator/Examiner
At the Tier 1 level, the Lead Senior Investigator/Examiner should meet the, minimum
qualifications of a Tier 1 examiner, with these additional responsibilities:
e Have overall responsibility for the Cyber and Social Media Unit.
e Provide support and assistance to Tier I and/or Tier II personnel.
e Perform advanced analysis and reporting of evidence.
e Ensure a policy is in place to allow for delegation of duties.
./4


--- page break ---

52/4
e Regularly review the Standard Operating Procedures (S.O.Ps) as relates to laboratory
personnel, activities, and records.
e Create and maintain documentation reflecting the review and training in the application
of the SOP with any examiners handling mobile device evidence.
e Seek and maintain advanced training and certifications for lab examiners.
Recommended Qualifications:
e qual or higher qualifications as it pertains to Tier 1 Investigator/Examiner.
e Tertiary Education (Bachelor’s degree) (Master’s Degree — preferred) in the technology
field.
e Investigative experience.
e Supervisory skills and training.
e Knowledge in the use of the examination equipment, software, and the procedures used
in conducting examinations.
4.4 RECRUITMENT AND SELECTION PROCESS
Officers intending to consider recruitment for the CSMU will be required to submit to the
following: -
ip Submit a written application to the Head of CSMU.
2. Undergo an Assessment which includes the following:
= Polygraph testing
» An Interview
3 Security Vetting
=" Background checks
4. Oath of Secrecy
45 RENUMERATION PACKAGE
Officers attached to the CSMU are approved for the following allowances as relates to their
current job requirements and specialization: -
Commuted Allowance
Plain Clothes Allowance
Specialization Allowance


--- page break ---

52/5
46 ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE.
The Cyber & Social Media Unit will be outfitted administratively as follows: -
SANCTIONED STRENGTH
ASSISTANT SUPERINTENDENT
ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPORT OFFICERS
POLICE STRENGTH DISTRIBUTION
DEPARTMENTS INSP. CONST. TOTAL
C.S.M.U 1 2 2 4 16 25
HEADQUARTERS
5: MAIN FUNCTIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

= To conduct live analysis on networks, connected, and multiple online platforms. Additionally, to
collect data/information from digital devices.

Devices: - *Computers, *Mobile Devices and *Digital Video Recorders (D.V.R)

« To recover data such as documents, emails, photos, videos and user data from computers/laptops
hard drives, mobile devices and other ‘digital storage media, that may be corrupted, deleted,
encrypted or otherwise manipulated.

" Conduct social media research, analysis and investigations related to cybercrimes and online
criminal activities.

« Analyze network connected storage devices and cloud services.


--- page break ---

52/6
» To use approved and accredited mobile forensic programs and tools to perform mobile device
data extraction and to perform analysis and reporting of digital evidence.
= Utilize forensic tools with investigative methods to find electronic data and assist investigators to
analyze data and evaluate its relevance to the cases which are under investigation.
= Provide comprehensive digital forensic reports and comprehensive statements for any
investigations where digital evidence form part of the overall case.
= To provide call data records and call data analysis.
= Conduct lectures, training and seminars both within the TTPS and amongst external stakeholders
in order to share information and build awareness of cybercrimes and social media threats thereby
developing the public/private partnerships with the TTPS.
6. GENERAL
| The level of digital analysis needed to support investigations continue to expand in volume and
complexity. The initiatives outlined above will help advance the unit in becoming more capable,
effective, and in-line with industry best practices. It is therefore recommended that the unit be established
; as a stand-alone unit and the new cyber protocols be initiated as per departmental order
PART II — NIL
Commissioner of Police
