ne olice Orders by Mr. Gary Griffith
CAN Commissioner of Police
Ko Police Administration Building
er Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
ee Port of Spain
"Pemorecr ass Friday 20" March, 2020
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian employees
of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
No. 59 Departmental Order PART I-NIL
PART II
Establishment of the Air Support Unit (A.S.U.) in the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service.
1. ESTABLISHMENT
The Commissioner of Police has taken a strategic decision to fully establish the Air Support
Unit (A.S.U.) within the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service (TTPS) with effect from Friday
28" February, 2020 in keeping with the new organizational structure of the TTPS. The TTPS
A.S.U. is classified as a Class One (1) Specialist Section and will fall under the DCP
Administration and Operational Support and ACP Specialized Support. The Manager of the ASU
will report directly to the ACP Specialized Support. He may also be required to report directly
to the Commissioner of Police or DCP Administration and Operational Support in special
circumstances. The establishment of the TTPS ASU will also coincide with the Strategic Plan
2019-2021 “Transformation and Modernization of the TTPS”. The TTPS ASU will also identify
with the present Operating Plan in particular with Strategic Priority #1 by fostering community
partnerships to assist in the restoration of public trust and confidence, #2 by acting as a force
multiplier for the TTPS to increase public safety and #3 by incorporation of new technology in
all aspects of policing to gain operational excellence.
2. INTENTION
The intention of this order is to clearly outline the official establishment of the TTPS Air Support
Unit and define administrative guidelines for effective management and operations. Also to
develop and improve protocols for all aerial units being deployed on behalf of the TTPS and
belonging to the TTPS in the provision of Aerial picture back to the TTPS Command Centre
3. BACKGROUND
The TTPS started requesting aerial support several years ago. One of the early providers was the
National Security Air Division which provided civil registered aircraft for major police operations
including insertion and extraction of OCNU personnel for narcotic eradication. This use and
provision continued with state owned National Helicopter Services Ltd. On formation of the
Special Anti-Crime Unit of Trinidad and Tobago, new technology became available including
thermal cameras, spot lights and loud speakers. The TTPS Air Support Unit was first
operationalized as a pilot project in 2011 to utilize the mentioned assets. A handful of qualified
aviators were selected from within the TTPS to form a dedicated team to deal with the use of
these aerial assets and those belonging to other agencies including the Trinidad and Tobago Air
Guard. This decision proved to be an invaluable one based on the overwhelming success achieved
to date. The TTPS ASU was also very successful in utilizing a fixed wing aircraft in 2012 of
which the TTPS ASU had total operational control and from 2017 to present has incorporated the
use of Unmanned Aerial Systems’ also with total operational which has both proven to be
successful. In the year 2019 the TTPS ASU also utilized Fixed Wing Long Range and tethered
Quadcopter Unmanned Aerial Systems as an initiative by the Commissioner_of Police which
demonstrated improved and modern capabilities.


--- page break ---

59/2
4. RATIONALE
The Trinidad and Tobago Police Service is already involved in the use of Aerial Assets by the
pilot initiative “Trinidad and Tobago Police Service Air Support Unit” in conducting Airborne
Law Enforcement. An assessment of the aerial operations has shown the tremendous
achievements by this initiative and substantiates the need for the establishment of the unit.
Although the production of multimedia information for court purposes are still “a work in action”,
aerial platforms continue to be utilized for the benefit of various Sections and Branches of the
TTPS by the Air Support Unit providing an aerial perspective and situational awareness for
different operations.
5. JUSTIFICATION FOR A DEDICATED AIR SUPPORT UNIT
The Trinidad and Tobago Police Service is mandated by law to detect crime and other infractions
of the law. As such, the Executive has created strategic plans and goals of the organization to
realize its mandate. The embracing of new technology surrounding Airborne Law Enforcement
is a major way that we can develop in keeping with these laid policies and also reflect the
approaches taken by other police jurisdictions across the world.
The formation of an Air Support Unit shows that the organization not only recognizes the
usefulness of Police Officers being the direct provider of the much needed aerial support, but also
demonstrates the intent of the organization to take the responsible step of having trained and
qualified persons in the field of Aviation manage all aspects of Airborne Law Enforcement. This
is a standard and best practice approach as adopted by Police Departments in other lead countries
including but not limited to the United States of America, Canada, United Kingdom and Australia
which have all treated their respective dedicated Air Units as “a profession within a profession”.
The usefulness of aerial assets by an established Air Support Unit includes:
Complementing the approach of the TTPS to enhance the perception of the public.
With the force multiplier effect, the organization on its own can free up resources and be able to
respond to emergency situations or crimes in progress with increased effectiveness and efficiency.
Contributing to the safety of Police Officers
By creating constant situational awareness in high risk situations.
Contributing to the overall safety and security needs of Trinidad and Tobago
With the assurance that a dedicated unit in the TTPS will be able to access and provide aerial
support, it increases public safety by minimizing the dangers of high risk pursuits to the general
public. The unit would also be able to provide a significant public safety tool during major
disasters and other emergency incidents.
Complementing traditional policing tools for crime prevention
The TTPS is widely known for its forward thinking philosophy of Community Policing especially
with the popular motto “To protect and serve with pride”
With global modernization, so to must all the major National Security service providers follow
and align themselves.
The criminal element is also improving by way of weapons, thinking and organized crimes.
Simply put, with our change in environmental crime prevention, it is not just a matter of bigger
bars on windows and doors and better alarm or private security systems. Crime prevention is a
tool box full of tools inclusive of new strategies, techniques and modern equipment intended to
match and over power the criminal element.
ee)


--- page break ---

59/3
Subject matter experts
TTPS ASU officer brings the law enforcement aspect to the aerial operation especially when the
service provider is civilian based. The officer is already trained and competent to utilize the assets
being provided. The officer is already detailed to provide aerial support if needed and work
directly with the service providers. The officer is in possession of additional aviation equipment
and capable of its specialized use. The officer is in possession of TTPS issued radio equipment
to enable communication with responding ground units from aerial assets provided by other
agencies. The presence of the officer penetrates the organizational operational differences
between the TTPS and service providers. The TTPS ASU is the constant in the equation by being
aware in advance of the details, complexity and methodology from a police perspective
surrounding the requested task.
6. MANDATE
The TTPS ASU is mandated to acquire and /or provide “key specialized aviation support
services” for both overt and covert operations to all Divisions, Branches, Sections and Units
within the TTPS, external Law Enforcement Agencies, Government Departments and the general
public within the territory of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago and external territory subject
to any international agreement. The TTPS ASU will achieve its mandate by utilizing both Manned
: and Unmanned Aerial platforms as specialized aviation support service tools in response to
requests for aerial support services by all internal and external stakeholders.
The TTPS ASU will continue providing specialized aerial support to the entire TTPS and will
especially liaise, prioritize and work closely with:
The Special Operations Response Team (Platforms for tactical support and surveillance)
S.LU.
A.C.LB
Special Branch
The Counter Trafficking Unit
Strategic Services Agency (SSA)
Cyber and Social Media Unit (CSMU)
Customs and Excise Division
Immigration
The Trinidad and Tobago Defence Force
The Trinidad and Tobago Coast Guard and any established Marine Unit in the TTPS
The Trinidad and Tobago Air Guard
The Trinidad and Tobago Prison Service
The Trinidad and Tobago Civil Aviation Authority
Airports Authority of Trinidad and Tobago
National Helicopter Services Limited
: 7. OBJECTIVE
The objective of the TTPS ASU is to provide specialized aerial support services under the
following banners:
VISION: Utilize aerial assets to assist in making every place in Trinidad and Tobago safe.
MISSION: To partner with internal and external stakeholders and provide quality aerial support
services in support of the general mission of the TTPS
MOTTO : To protect and serve from the air.
./4


--- page break ---

59/4
8. ROLES AND FUNCTIONS

The roles and functions of the unit include but are not limited to:

(a) Receive all requests for aerial support on behalf of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service
and other stakeholders

(b) Put requests in order of priority and substantiate the need with the First Division Officer or
mandated officer in charge of the relevant Section/Branch/Unit.

(c) Respond to the request if able with assets owned by the TTPS or determine the most suitable
agency to facilitate the request based on type of asset, type of equipment, capability of asset
and capability of operators.

(d) In the case of utilizing another agency, forward a formal request on behalf of the Trinidad and
Tobago Police Service.

(e) Deal with logistical requirements for all Airborne Law Enforcement operations including
preparation of staging areas and landing zones, establishing command posts, provide ASU
personnel to accomplish given tasks, establish communication between aerial asset operator
and supporting units.

(f) Record details of all Airborne operations for future reference. ,

9. CORE COMPETENCIES

The core competencies to be a member of the TTPS ASU include but are not limited to the

following: integrity, managing performance, leadership, employee relations, teamwork,

achieving results, organizational awareness, networking, customer service, problem solving, and
effective communication. Members will be required to have a working knowledge of aerial assets
used, navigational skills and follow developed standard operating procedures. Prior Airborne Law

Enforcement and Aviation experience as well as aviation training and certification relative to

platforms used will be an asset and mandatory in some cases.
10. RECRUITMENT AND SELECTION PROCESS |
Officers desirous of being considered for recruitment into the ASU will be required to:
(a) Submit a written application to the Aviation Unit Manager (invitation to be published in the
TTPS Portal)
(b) Undergo an assessment including a Physical evaluation, Psychometric testing, Polygraph
testing and an interview
(c) Be vetted (security) including background checks and drug testing
(d) Take the Oath of Secrecy
(e) Be subjected to continuous Polygraph and Drug testing
(f) Be subjected to regular reassessments with respect to all mentioned and other proficiencies
11. RENUMERATION
Subject to approval, TTPS ASU officers will be paid:
(a) Commuted Overtime Allowance
(b) Plain Clothes Allowance
(c) Proficiency allowance for a particular specialized skill and function subject to approval
12. LOCATION
The main office for the TTPS ASU will be located at the Piarco Police Station Golden Grove
Road Piarco with operational and deployment offices at Cumuto Airbase Cumuto , designated
aerodromes and other locations subject to approval.
../5


--- page break ---

59/5
13. DRESS
Officers attached to the TTPS ASU will be attired as follows:
DESCRIPTION DUTY
Black Fire retardant Flight Suits During manned aircraft flight
Regulation Patrol Orders Ceremonial and other Uniformed events
| Emblems and badges shall be worn subject to the approval of the Commissioner of Police
14. ADMINISTRATIVE STRUCTURE
The Commissioner of Police (COP) will have overall responsibility of the TTPS ASU. The
Aviation Unit Manager shall report to the COP through the DCP Administration and Operational
Support and ACP Specialized Support unless otherwise directed.
RANK/OFFICE SANCTIONED
STRENGTH
ae eee i ee
: Sergeants 2 1 Administration, 1
Operations
Corporals 3 1 Chief Clerk and
Multi Media
Custodian, 2
Supervisors
Constables 12 Drone Operators,
Flight Crew and
Ground Crew
The Aviation Unit Manager
lies within the ranks specified
and selected based on
experience, qualifications
and training.
Sanctioned strength subject
to be increased or decreased
based on the types and
number of assets operated,
designated duties and
required manpower at
particular times


--- page break ---

59/6
SUPPORT STAFF
DIRECTOR OF MAINTENANCE NEED BASED ON TYPES OF ASSETS
USED AND- ANY — EXISTING
CONTRACT
ac slime cE: eS a
: JOB SPECIFICATIONS
AVIATION UNIT MANAGER (AUM)
A Police Officer appointed by the Commissioner of Police of at least the rank of Sergeant with 8
years supervisory experience with the requisite training and experience to effectively manage and
maintain aerial assets and oversee Airborne Law Enforcement operations.
The AUM will be responsible for selecting suitable candidates to perform duties with the ASU
including Pilots, Tactical Flight Officers, Tactical Systems Operators and other support staff as
sanctioned by the COP and relevant Executive officer.
The AUM will be responsible for making recommendations with respect to emerging aerial
platforms to be used by the unit and also make recommendations for any needed aviation training
and development with respect to officers attached to the ASU whether locally or internationally.
The AUM will act as a liaison between the TTPS and other aerial platform providers including
but not limited to the Trinidad and Tobago Civil Aviation Authority, Airports Authority of
Trinidad and Tobago, Trinidad and Tobago Air Guard and National Helicopter Services Limited.
The AUM will be responsible for the administration of duties of all personnel attached to the
ASU including rostering for duty and ensuring that the required currency for all personnel are
met.
The AUM will be responsible for the development of standard operating procedures by the ASU
subject to approval by the COP.
ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT
A qualified Civilian Police Employee as a direct assistant to the AUM who would be required to
record, retrieve and prepare documentation for the effective management of the unit based on
modern day techniques and aviation standards.
PILOTS (subject to any future aircraft acquisition or use)
Persons authorized according to Trinidad and Tobago Civil Aviation authority requirements to
act as Pilot in Command of any particular aircraft and also authorized by the AUM based on
standard operating procedures sanctioned by the COP.
REMOTE PILOT
Persons authorized according to Trinidad and Tobago Civil Aviation authority requirements to
act as Remote Pilot in Command of any particular unmanned aerial vehicle and also authorized
by the AUM based on standard operating procedures sanctioned by the COP.
TACTICAL FLIGHT OFFICERS (subject to any future aircraft acquisition or use)
Persons authorized according to Trinidad and Tobago Civil Aviation authority requirements to
act as crew member and equipment operator of any particular aircraft and also authorized by the
AUM based on standard operating procedures sanctioned by the COP.
TACTICAL SYSTEMS OPERATOR
Persons authorized according to Trinidad and Tobago Civil Aviation authority requirements to
act as ground UAV non flying equipment of any particular UAV and also authorized by the AUM
based on standard operating procedures sanctioned by the COP.


--- page break ---

59/7
SUPPORT STAFF
Persons authorized to perform ground support logistic duties for airborne law enforcement
operations by the AUM based on standard operating procedures sanctioned by the COP whether
sworn or contracted.
15. GENERAL
This initial official establishment of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service Air Support Unit
provides an immediate framework for the effective and structured provision of continued
specialized air support services within the TTPS. As such, the TTPS ASU will consist of Police
Officers with special skill-sets, training, qualifications and experience in the fields of Airborne
Law Enforcement and General Aviation.
RONNY RAMPALLARD Police Sergeant Regimental Number 16104 is appointed as
Aviation Unit Manager from the date of establishment.
All official communication with regards to specialized air support services can be made to the
unit via:
Telephone Contacts: 689-0813, 708-1669, 708-1674 and 708-1664
Email Address : ttpsairsupport(@ttps.gov.tt
16. AUTHORITY
This Departmental Order is enacted pursuant to Section 193 (1) (b) of the Police Service
Regulations, 2007.
PART II — NIL
| Commissioner of Police
