G&S ») Police Orders by
gy Commissioner of Police
sy" ¥ Police Administration Building
ae Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
. oe Sean o Port of Spain
PRovecr an SO Thursday 5" June 2015
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
No 57 Departmental Order PART I—NIL
PART II
AMENDMENTS TO THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE CHILD
PROTECTION UNIT
The following amendments to the Departmental Order will now take effect to achieve the desired
objective:
Amendments:
1. INTENTION
It is to be noted that the Child Protection Unit will specifically investigate matters of
recent Sexual Offences/Abuse, Physical Abuse, Abandonment, Neglect and Ill-treatment
to children under 18 years. Crimes/ Offenses such as Homicide and Infanticide,
attempted murder, attempted infanticide, abduction and kidnapping, trafficking and
Smuggling, Fraud Offences, Drug Related offenses, Corruption, Financial Crimes, Motor
Vehicle and Road Traffic Offenses, School fights, occurrences, even though the victim is
18 and under these crimes/offences are to be investigated by the relevant _units/
department.
If it becomes necessary for a social intervention in the life of the victim, and or offender,
depending on the nature of the offense, then the Child Protection Unit will lend support
by contacting the Children’s Authority.


--- page break ---

2/57
2. DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITES
EY DB OYERESEUNSIDILITES
Superintendent
Departmental Order 15 of 2015 is amended by deleting paragraph 6 subsection 3 and
replacing it with :-
2. Hold monthly meetings with all Heads of each Child Protection Unit.
Assistant Superintendent of Police
Departmental Order 15 of 2015 is amended by deleting paragraph 3 and replacing it
with :-
3. Hold fortnightly meetings with the Head of Child Protection Units under his/her
supervision to discuss cases, matters and issues impacting the unit.
Departmental Order 15 of 2015 is amended by inserting in paragraph 9 the word
“relevant” to read:
9. Ensure that relevant reports involving children are properly investigated and reports with
recommendations are submitted in a timely manner.
Departmental Order 15 of 2015 is amended by deleting paragraph 10 :-
Police Inspector
Departmental Order 15 of 2015 is amended by inserting in paragraph 3 the word “designated” to
read:-
3. Guide junior officers in investigating designated criminal matters involving children.
Departmental Order 15 of 2015 is amended by inserting in paragraph 5 the words “if available”
to read:-
5. If available, in collaboration with Community Police sections lecture to schools and community
groups on specific aspects, functions and objectives of the Child Protection Unit and the
Children’s Authority.


--- page break ---

3/57

Departmental Order 15 of 2015 is amended by inserting in paragraph 12 the words “the offences
investigated by the unit “to read:-

12. Ensure that all records and statistics pertaining to the offences investigated by the unit are
properly prepared and maintained.

Police Sergeant

Departmental Order 15 of 2015 is amended by inserting in paragraph 3 the words “and being
investigated by the CPU” to read:-

3.Communicate and collaborate with the Child Services Associate (CSA)/Children’s Authority

Representative, in relation to cases which are being investigated by the CPU.

Departmental Order 15 of 2015 is amended by inserting in paragraph 4 the words “being
undertaken by the unit” to read:-

4.Assist, guide, coordinate and direct junior officers with all investigations being undertaken by

the unit , where a child is in need of care and protection.

Departmental Order 15 of 2015 is amended by inserting in paragraph 5 the words “being
investigated” to read:-

5. Ensure that a written interim report of all matters being investigated involving children is submitted

without delay, within twenty-four (24) hours to the Head of the Child Protection Unit (CPU).

Departmental Order 15 of 2015 is amended by deleting paragraph 8 :-
Departmental Order 15 of 2015 is amended by inserting in paragraph 10 the words “and being
investigated by the CPU” to read:-

10. Obtain evidence and arrest suspects who have perpetrated crimes against children and are being

investigated by the CPU.


--- page break ---

4/57
Departmental Order 15 of 2015 is amended by inserting in paragraph 14 the words “being
investigated by the CPU” to read:-
14. Plan and coordinate specific operations such as, searches of vehicles/buildings or persons held for
the commission of offences against children being investigated by CPU.

Departmental Order 15 of 2015 is amended by inserting in paragraph 15 the words “and Victim

and Witness Support Unit” to read:-

15. Identify the need for and arrange social and/or psychological support for victims of domestic
violence through communications with the Children’s Authority and Victim and Witness
Support Unit.

Departmental Order 15 of 2015 is amended by inserting in paragraph 16 the words “an” and

“including hotspot areas” to read:-

16. Supervise and coordinate the meeting of the Children’s Services Associate (CSA) at a selected
location whenever the CSA is required to go into an area, including hotspot areas or where a
situation may be deemed volatile.

Departmental Order 15 of 2015 is amended by inserting in paragraph 17 the words “of juvenile

prisoners received from stations” to read:-

17. Maintain records of personnel, equipment, child victims, juvenile prisoners, complaints and
reports of juvenile prisoners received from stations and prepare weekly/monthly returns for
submission to the Head of the Child Protection Unit.

Departmental Order 15 of 2015 is amended by deleting paragraph 18:-

Departmental Order 15 of 2015 is amended by inserting in paragraph 22 the word “fortnightly”

to read:-

22. Meet with the Head of the Child Protection Unit (CPU) fortnightly.

Police Corporal

Departmental Order 15 of 2015 is amended by inserting in paragraph 3 the word “investigated by

the CPU” to read:-

3. Supervise all reports and investigations and the submissions of files/reports, involving reports
investigated by the CPU where child/children are victim/s.


--- page break ---

57
Police Corporal
Departmental Order 15 of 2015 is amended by inserting in paragraph 5 the word “and being
investigated by the CPU” to read:-
5. Conduct and supervise the searches of scenes and its peripheries for evidence relating to any
enquiry or investigation which is being investigated by the CPU.
Departmental Order 15 of 2015 is amended by inserting in paragraph 6 the word “and being
investigated by the CPU” to read:-
6. Ensure that interim reports of a serious nature involving children and being investigated by the
CPU are submitted without delay for onward transmission to the Head of the Child Protection
Unit (CPU).
Departmental Order 15 of 2015 is amended by inserting in paragraph 10 the word “being
investigated by the CPU” to read:-
10. Monitor and visit child victims such as those undergoing treatment at health institutions in matters
being investigated by the CPU.
Departmental Order 15 of 2015 is amended by deleting paragraph 11 :-
Departmental Order 15 of 2015 is amended by inserting in paragraph 12 the word “including” to
read:-
12. Supervise and coordinate meetings with the Child Services Associate (CSA), at selected locations
including whenever the CSA is required to go into “Hotspot” areas.
Departmental Order 15 of 2015 is amended by inserting in paragraph 13 the words “in matters
under investigations” to read:-
13. Record reports and entries, serve summonses and execute warrants and other official documents as
maybe directed to do from time to time in matters under investigations.
Departmental Order 15 of 2015 is amended by inserting in paragraph 16 the words “Make notes
and” to read:-
16. Make notes and issue warnings to children suspected of using and or being in the possession of
tobacco products or alcohol, and immediately notify the Children’s Authority, the parent or guardian or
the person with responsibility for the child.


--- page break ---

6/57

Police Constable

Departmental Order 15 of 2015 is amended by inserting in paragraph 1 the words “designated to

be investigated by the CPU” and “such” to read:-

1. Respond immediately to all reports designated to be investigated by the CPU involving children
and ensure that proper and thorough investigations/enquiries are conducted into all such reports
whether walk-ins, via telephone or correspondence.

Departmental Order 15 of 2015 is amended by inserting in paragraph 2 the word “such” to read:-

2. Consult with the SDO i/c immediately upon receipt of all such reports involving child victims or
suspects.

Departmental Order 15 of 2015 is amended by inserting in paragraph 4 the words “being

conducted by the CPU” and deleting “children” to read:-

4. Conduct searches of scenes and its peripheries for evidence relating to any enquiry or investigation
being conducted by the CPU.

Departmental Order 15 of 2015 is amended by inserting in paragraph 5 the words “and

designated to be investigated by the CPU” to read:-

5. Immediately submit without delay an interim report in writing, of all reports of a serious

nature involving children and designated to be investigated by the CPU for onward

transmission to the Head of the Child Protection Unit (CPU).

Departmental Order 15 of 2015 is amended by inserting in paragraph 6 the words “being

investigated by the CPU” to read:-

6. Conduct investigations of persons suspected of offences perpetrated against children and being
investigated by the CPU. Interview suspects and immediately submit reports to supervisor.


--- page break ---

7/57
Police Constable
Departmental Order 15 of 2015 is amended by inserting in paragraph 8 the words “in matters
being investigated by the CPU” to read:-
8. Monitor and visit child victims such as those undergoing treatment at health institutions in matters
being investigated by the CPU.
Departmental Order 15 of 2015 is amended by inserting in paragraph 9 the words “required” and
in matters under investigation” and deleting “by the relevant authority” to read:-
9. Record reports, serve summons and execute warrants and other official documents as required from
time to time in matters under investigations.
GENERAL
The establishment of the child Protection Unit (CPU) is a clear indication of the resolve of the
Executive of the TTPS as we continue with initiatives in the fight against crime. It is important
that we should focus on the safety, care and protection of the nation’s children, our best
investment. As to make every place safe and to provide a caring approach to the sensitivity of
crime, it is our duty to act with professionalism, tact and good judgment in how we respond to
criminal issues affecting children.
As we execute plans, let us all be united in our effort, relentless in our pursuit and selfless in our
purpose. May God bless us as we work in partnership with our citizens of Trinidad and Tobago.
PART Ii] — NIL
: seins
