Police Orders by
Ce) Commissioner of Police
Sf Police Administration Building
CAS Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
RK Port of Spain
aster Wednesday 25" April 2018
PProrecr sag (This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
ap
No. 52 Departmental Order PARTS 1 & Il - NIL
PART II
NOTICE

COSTAATT Applications for: Associate Science Degree in Management Studies for the

INVITATION Protective Services
The College of Science Technology and Applied Arts of Trinidad and Tobago
(COSTAATT), is inviting applications from Police Officers of the Trinidad and
Tobago Police Service for the Associate Science Degree in Management Studies
for the Protective Services.
This programme exposes participants to managerial concepts both in theory and
practice, as well as other critical skills such as communication, ethics, information
technology and law. These are all designed to enhance their skills and allow for
greater efficiency, which today is the focal point in the transformation of the public
sector. This will also allow successful participants to respond effectively as change
agents upon their return to the organization.
This full-time programme will be delivered in two (2) years, twenty-four (24)
calendar months and this years’ intake will begin on 28" August, 2018, with an
anticipated end date in August, 2020.
Interested personnel of the rank of Assistant Superintendent of Police, Inspector of
Police and Sergeant of Police are required to complete the prescribed COSTAATT
registration forms along with their Curriculum Vitae which must be forwarded
through their respective Heads of Divisions/Sections/Branches/Units to reach the
Deputy Commissioner of Police ‘Administration’ no later than 31** May, 2018.
Persons are also required to submit in writing in no more than 1000 words, their
reason(s) for applying to do this programme and how undertaking this programme
will benefit both themselves and the organization.
Registration forms are available at the Human Resource Branch (Second Floor) Training
Section. Administration Building, Corner Edward and Sackville Streets, Port of Span and
COSTAATT’s website.

wel


--- page break ---

52/2
COSTAATT Complete COSTAATT forms must be accompanied with the following
INVITATION Con’t documents:-
1 Certified Copy of Birth Certificate
I. Certified Copy of National Identification Card
III. Certificate of Academic Qualifications
IV. Recent Performance Appraisal
V. Curriculum Vitae
Police Officers who are holders of Masters, First Degree and/or an Associate
Degree from a recognized University are not eligible to apply for this programme.
ay,
Commissioner of Police
