No. 06 
Police Orders by Mr. Trevor Paul 
Commissioner of Police 
Police Administration Building 
Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets 
Port of Spain 
Thursday 1 olh January 2008 
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian 
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press) 
Departmental Order PART 1- NIL 
PART 11 
Restoration of the Public's Confidence 
1. INFORMATION 
1.1 Members ofthe Executive ofthe Trinidad and Tobago Police Service are very much concerned 
over the high level of criminal activities pervading our twin island state. In addressing the many 
reports of inaction and /or unprofessional conduct by Police Officers in servicing reports 
emanating from members of the public , the Executive has embarked upon measures with a view 
to providing more efficient and effective policing . 
2. AUTHORITY 
2.1 This Order is made in accordance with the provisions of Section 5 {1) of the Police Standing 
Order No. 2 of2001 . 
3. INTENTION 
3.1 This Order is designed to: -
(a) Put a proper management structure in place with a view to improving efficiency 
and effectiveness . 
(b) Ensure that a First Division Officer is available in each division throughout 
Trinidad and Tobago to advise and coordinate specific activities on a 24 hour 
basis. 
(c) Improve accountability by the First Division Officers . 
(d) Enhance the quality of the service provided to the public by members of the Police 
Service. 
(e) Ensure higher police visibility. 
(f) Identify and take measures to address any shortages . 
(g) Ensure that all instructions are relayed to the ground level. 
.. ./2 



06/2 
4. METHOD 
4.1 In order to effectively execute measures throughout Trinidad and Tobago, as enunciated in this 
order, the whole Island has been demarcated into four zones/regions. The Assistant Commissioner 
in charge of each zone/region shall detail an officer of the First Division, which may include 
the officer in charge of the division to manage over a 24 hour period. This Officer is to be 
provided with a vehicle and a driver for the purpose of carrying out his/her duty. 
Region 1 
Region 3 
4.2 PROCEDURE : 
South Western Division 
Southern Division 
Central Division 
North Eastern Division 
Northern Division 
Eastern Division 
Region 2 
Region 4 
Port of Spain Division 
Western Division 
Inter Agency Task Force 
Tobago Division 
t. Increase foot and mobile patrols by officers in uniform and marked police 
vehicles. 
11. Conduct Sporadic Road checks 
111. Stop and Search persons/vehicles 
tv. Intercept stolen vehicles/arrest perpetrators 
v. Curtail/monitor the movements of members of the criminal element from one 
zone/region to the next. 
v1. Seizure of dangerous drugs 
vu. Seizure of illegal frrearms and ammunition 
vm. Effective Communication 
5. DURATION 
5. 1 The plan commences on Tuesday 1st January 2008 and continues for a period of ninety (90) 
days and will be reviewed at the end of such time. 
6. REPORTING RELATIONSHIP 
6.1 In order to ensure that the management structure remains intact for a more efficient and 
effective operation ofthe Plan, the Chain of Command must not be broken, except for an 
emergency. The First Division Officer on duty in each region /zone shall be responsible for 
co-coordinating all activities in the divisions of which he/she will be on duty over the twenty­
four hour period as it pertains to the following : -
Patrols 
Roadblocks 
Persons stopped and searched 
Exercises 
Firearm/ammunition seized 
Narcotics seized 
Persons arrested 
.. ./3 



06/3 
The First Division Officer on duty, if not the head of the division on completion of his/her tour 
of duty must submit a comprehensive report to the Assistant Commissioner in charge of the 
region concerned and copied to the Head of the Division. The respective Assistant 
Commissioner of Police shall forward same to the Deputy Commissioner Crime and 
Operations for transmission to the Commissioner of Police. The Assistant Commissioner will 
also be responsible for submitting a monthly return of all F.D.Os detailed to the 
aforementioned Deputy Commissioner. 
7. COMMUNICATION 
7.1 The First Division Officers detailed for duty must be provided with wireless communication. 
Channel 2 would be used for communication purposes. 
Personnel are reminded to adhere to all communication protocols. 
8. TARGETED OUTCOME 
8.1 (a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
Reduce crime and the fear of crime 
Create safer communities 
Enhance the public's confidence and trust in the Police Service 
Increase the removal of illegal firearms and ammunition from the hands of 
the criminals 
(e) Reduction in the number ofvehicles being stolen. 
(f) Reduction in road Traffic Accidents and other traffic violations. 
9. CONCLUSION 
9.1 I urge you to put your best foot forward at all times in this period of sacrifice and 
commitment. These will transcend the festive season, unto the Carnival season and unto the 
Easter period. These are testing times for us as law enforcement officers and every effort 
must be made to confront the challenge with great determination and pride: -
P-presence, 
R -relationships, 
1-image, 
D-devotion, 
E-e:fficiency 
Commissio 