SS Police Orders by
a Commissioner of Police
a Police Administration Building
vs Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
70 th
PRovecr ae SO Tuesday 12" June, 2018
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
No. 77 Departmental Order PART I—NIL
PART II
Speed Measuring Devices
Legal Reference(s): Act 12 of 2014 (Section 62 MVRTA Chap 48:50); Legal Notice 60 of 2016
(1) In this Order :-
“pre-operational checks” is a quality control measure for speed measuring devices to be conducted
to confirm the speed measuring device is in satisfactory condition, properly calibrated and working
properly as per manufacturer’s instructions and guidelines on approved devices.
“approved devices keeper” is a police officer of the rank of Corporal and above who is a Certified
Speed Measuring Device Operator.
“approved device” means the device approved by Order issued by the Minister with responsibility
for Works and Transport used to measure the speed at which a vehicle is being driven in accordance
with Section 62(6A) of the Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Act.
“authorised officer” means a Police Constable who has been authorized by the Commissioner of
Police to operate a speed measuring device approved for measuring the speed of vehicles in
accordance with Section 62(6F)(a) of the Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Act.
“speed measurement” is the quantitative measurement of the speed at which a vehicle is being
driven as displayed by an approved device.
“calibration” is a procedure which sets the device to a known standard value;
“custodian” means a First Division Officer appointed by Division/Branch/Section Commander to
be the manager of all approved devices.
“constable” carries the same meaning as under Section 3 of the Police Service Act and Special
Reserve Police Act.
“consumables” refers to all equipment necessary for the effective and accurate use of the approved
speed measurement devices as per manufacturers requirements.
woe 2


--- page break ---

77/2
“certificate of vehicle speed measurement” refers to the printout from the speed measuring device
in accordance with Section 62(6E) (b) of the Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Act.
Identification, Requisition and Recording of Speed Measuring Devices
(2) All speed measuring devices shall be permanently marked with a Trinidad and Tobago Police
Service (TTPS) number as identified in Appendix A.
(3) The Assistant Commissioner of Police responsible for Operations shall be responsible for
the requisition of all approved devices, peripheral supporting equipment and consumables.
(4) The Head of Information Technology shall keep a record of all approved devices and
peripheral equipment issued to the Police service noting specifically —
1. The Serial Number and corresponding TTPS number of each device;
2. The Date of Issue to the Police Service:
3. The Division/Branch/Section to which each instrument has been assigned:
4. The Date of Assignment to the Division/Branch/Section.
Record Keeping of List of Authorised Officers in the TTPS
(5) The Assistant Commissioner of Police (ACP) Operations shall be provided with an updated
nominal role of all authorized officers attached to the TTPS by the Senior Superintendent of
the Police Training Academy on the first week of January and first week of July every year.
a) This list shall reflect the following:
e The number, rank and name of the officer
e The Division Section, Branch, Unit he is attached
e Validation period of Training i.e. — Date of Course and Expiration Date
e Certificate Number issued from the Commissioner of Police
(6) The Senior Superintendent Police Training Academy shall have responsibility for the
following —
a) Training of all Police Constables in the use and operation of all approved devices.
b) Training selected officers in Train the Trainer Programmes in use of approved devices.
wow


--- page break ---

77/3

c) Submit to the Commissioner of Police a nominal role of all successfully trained officers
for authorization.

d) Retaining a copy of all authorized certificates signed and issued by the Commissioner
Police.

e) Provide an updated nominal role of all authorized officers to the
Division/Branch/Section Commanders upon request.

f) Appoint wherever necessary a Liaison officer(s) to assist the Division/Branch/Section
Commanders in effective implementation of procedures, equipment evaluation and
ensure compliance with this order.

Speed Measuring Device Equipment Management

(7) The Commander in Charge of a Division/Branch/Section shall appoint a Custodian for a
Division/Branch/Section.

(8) The Custodian shall appoint an Approved Devices Keeper at each
Station/Section/Branch/Unit where the approved devices have been issued or kept.

(a) The Approved Devices Keeper handing over responsibility for the management and

custody of approved devices shall transfer all approved devices under his control, along with

all supplies of consumables, files, records and registers related to the management and
custody of the approved devices, to the officer taking over.

(b) It shall be the duty of both the Approved Devices Keeper handing over and the officer

taking over to make a physical check of all the approved devices, consumables, files,

records and registers assigned to the Division/Branch/Section, Unit noting in particular the
device(s) Serial and TTPS numbers.

(c) It shall be the duty of the Approved Devices Keeper handing over and the officer taking

over to prepare a “Handover” in a manner set out in Appendix “B”.

(d) The “Handover” shall be prepared in quadruplicate, each officer retaining a copy, one

copy filed in the Division/Branch/Section’s administrative office and one copy forwarded

to the Custodian.
(9) The Approved Device Keeper Shall:

a) Keep a record of each approved speed measuring device assigned to his

Station/Branch/Section/Unit recording the TTPS Number and Serial Number.
/4


--- page break ---

77/4
b) Maintain a pre-operational check log book for approved speed measuring devices at his
Station/Section/Unit.
c) Keep a record of all speed measurement devices and supporting equipment issued to his
Station/Section/Unit:
d) Make and application as necessary to the Head of Information Technology via the
Custodian for re-issue of any associated consumables as listed in Appendix C:

Speed Gun Equipment Checks and Evidence Management

(10) The Approved Devices Keeper shall be responsible for all maintenance and readiness of
Speed Measuring Devices as well as allocated vehicles equipped with speed enforcement
equipment.

(11) The Approved Devices Keeper shall ensure that at a station where approved devices are kept
and used there is a TTPS Desktop Computer which shall be used to facilitate the secure
download of all digital files created from speed enforcement operations.

(12) The Approved Devices Keeper shall ensure that the digital files created from a speed
enforcement exercise are immediately transferred to an assigned TTPS Desktop Computer
after every speed enforcement exercise with folders created and labelled according to the
date of the use device.

(13) The Approved Devices Keeper shall review the files after transfer and verify the offence
detection to fixed penalty notices issued.

(14) The Approved Devices Keeper shall ensure that only trained and certified officers operate a
speed measuring device.

Pre-Operational Checks (Appendix D)

Laser Speed Gun

(15) Before operating any laser speed measuring device, the following procedures shall be
followed by the authorised officers :-

The officer shall perform the following checks prior to operational use:
a. Physical Check
b. System Check
wld


--- page break ---

THS
c. Heads Up Display Check
d. Scope Alignment Check
e. Camera Alignment Check
f. Fixed Distance Check (Certified Distance)

(16) Upon verification that the Speed Measuring Device is in proper working order, the
authorised officer shall make an entry in the Speed Device Log Book station stating his
Regimental Number, Rank and Name, date and time and the Serial and TTPS Number of
the Speed Measuring Device together with an entry in the Station Diary confirming that all
checks have been completed and the device is found to be in proper working condition.

(17) Any Speed Measuring Device found not to be in proper working condition shall be
immediately taken out of service and an entry made in the station diary stating the Speed
Measuring Devices serial number has been found not to be in proper working order.

(18) The Authorised Officer shall immediately report any Speed Measuring Devices found not
to be in proper working order to the Approved Devices Keeper and SDO/IC.

(19) It shall be the responsibility of the Custodian to ensure that all speed measuring devices
and/or associated equipment in need of repair or service are delivered to the Head of
Information Technology, ensuring a copy of the device’s TTPS & Serial Number is
recorded together with the date and time it was sent for service or repair.

In Vehicle Tablet Computer & In Vehicle Printer

(20) Before commencing any speed enforcement operation, an authorised officer shall make the
following checks to ensure the in vehicle tablet and printer are in proper working order:

a. When the tablet is mounted in the vehicle the officer shall ensure the power supply,
printer cable and Laser Speed Device cable are connected to the tablet.

b. The officer shall power on the device and confirm the operating system is functioning
properly. He shall confirm connectivity by performing a test print.

c. Before commencing any speed enforcement exercise the authorised officer shall ensure
that there is sufficient paper in vehicle printer.

Laser Speed Measuring Device Operations

(21) Before utilising any Speed Measuring device for traffic enforcement operations an
Authorised Officer shall enter the following information into the device :-

ilb


--- page break ---

77/6
a. His Regimental Number and Name
b. Date and Time (Verification)
c. Name of Roadway on which the Speed check is to be conducted
d. Speed Limit of the Roadway
e. Capture speed of the Device
(22) The authorised officer must ensure that the last Scope Alignment/Calibration Date and
Time matches the current date and time before commencing use in operations.
(23) Use the device and relevant accessories in accordance with training.
Issuance of Certificate of Vehicle Speed Measurement
(24) Where a vehicle has been detected to be exceeding a roadway speed limit by the approved
device, the authorised officer shall:
e Cause the offending vehicle to be stopped.
e Ensure that the image of the offending vehicles’ number plate is clearly depicted on the
Certificate of Vehicle Speed Measurement.
e Place his signature on the Certificate of Vehicle Speed Measurement.
e Ensure the Certificate of Vehicle Speed Measurement is delivered to the offending driver
together with the fixed penalty notice for the offence of exceeding the speeding limit.
e Verbally warn the driver of intended prosecution in accordance with Section 73 (1) of
the MVRTA Chap 48:50.
Post Operational Procedures
(25) Upon return to the Station/Section Unit after use of an approved device in enforcement
operations, the authorised officer shall:
e Ensure approved devices and associated equipment are removed from the police vehicle
and secured in the supplied protective casings.
e Make and entry in the Station Diary having retuned TTPS & Serial Number of the
approved device.
e Download the digital image speed evidence files from the In-Vehicle Tablet and Laser
Speed Device onto the assigned TTPS Desktop Computer by creating a digital folder for
the downloaded files which shall be labelled according to date.
wad?


--- page break ---

77/7
e Secure the approved devices and associated equipment in the area designated for storage.
e Where a Complainant requires a printed copy of the Certificate of Speed Measurement
for Court, the Approved Devices Keeper shall ensure that two printed copies are
provided for the Complainant’s case file.
Speed Team Deployment
(26) For speed enforcement operations a speed team should comprise of a minimum of four (4)
officers during the daytime and six (6) for night operations including the Authorised Officer.
Operational Site Selection, Health and Safety
(27) When setting up a site for speed enforcement operations the Authorised Officer shall take
the following into consideration.

a) The safety of all officers and the public.

b) The amount of roadway space for the safe stopping and shoulder space for bringing
offending vehicles safely to the side of the roadway for retrieving driver documents and
issuance of Fixed Penalty Notices.

c) Roadway lighting

d) Clearance for safely deploying night flash equipment onto the roadway.

(28) All officers engaged in stopping or directing vehicular traffic shall be attired in Police
Uniform and must wear a Reflective Traffic Safety Vest.
wok


--- page break ---

77/8

APPENDIX A — TTPS DEVICE MARKING

e TTPS-TCLSG-001 (TRU CAM LASER SPEED GUN-1)

e TTPS-TCF-001 (TRU CAM FLASH-1)

e TTPS-IVT-001 (IN-VEHICLE TABLET-1)

e TTPS-TRI-001 (TRIPOD-1)
APPENDIX B— SPEED DEVICE HAND OVER
Approved Devices Keeper Hand-Over (Speed Devices)
I handed over the duties of the Authorized Speed Devices Keeper Office to No.
Rank. Name. together with all keys and all government property
on hand:
Laser Speed Devices
1. Manufacturers Serial #
Trinidad and Tobago Police Service #
Log Book Serial #
2. Manufacturers Serial #
Trinidad and Tobago Police Service #
Log Book Serial #
Night Flash Kit
1. Manufacturers Serial #
Trinidad and Tobago Police Service #
2. Manufacturers Serial #
Trinidad and Tobago Police Service #

.../9


--- page break ---

77/10
APPENDIX D —- SPEED DEVICE PRE-OPERATIONAL CHECKS
| | PHYSICAL CHECK
a SYSTEMS CHECK
|| HUD CHECK
| | SCOPE ALIGHMENT CHECK
| | CAMERA ALIGNMENT CHECK
| | VERTICAL DISTANCE/ ZERO VELOCITY CHECK
| | IN-VEHICLE TABLET AND PRINTER CHECK (TEST PRINT)
a FLASH KIT BATTERY LEVEL CHECK (NIGHT OPERATIONS)
PART III — NIL
easel
- Commissioner of Police
