«) Police Orders by
; . Commissioner of Police
AWW Police Administration Building
BP cso  w8kce rue Sern Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
7? Pron ecy pao 3 Port of Spain
WITH PRIDE th
Tuesday 12" June, 2018
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
No. 78 Departmental Order PART I —NIL
PART II
INTRODUCTION OF THE FLEET CARD FACILITY FOR THE PROCUREMENT OF
FUEL BY THE TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO POLICE SERVICE (TTPS)
1. Introduction
1.1. Cabinet via Minute No. 2600 dated September 18, 2014 agreed, infer alia, to the
implementation of a new Fleet Card Facility for the procurement of fuel by Ministries and
Departments using a Credit card. The Government of Trinidad and Tobago has entered into
an agreement with the First Citizens Bank Limited (FCB) for the provision of Credit cards.
These credit cards (hereinafter referred to Fleet Cards) shall be used by TTPS personnel for
the purchase of fuel at any NP and Unipet service stations.
1.2. This Departmental Order serves to introduce the new system and sets out the procedures to
be adhered to the fueling of the TTPS Vehicles.
2. In this Order-
“Point-of-Sale (POS) receipts” refers to a receipt generated by the service stations after the
purchase of fuel.
“SDO i/c Fleet Cards” - Second Division Officer who is assigned the duties to oversee the
proper management of the Fleet Card Facility and shall report to the Divisional Fleet Card
Manager.
veo


--- page break ---

78/2
“Fleet Card - The Fleet Card allows the TTPS to purchase fuel from any service station
outlet in Trinidad and Tobago with of a Credit card; the Credit card will be coded to capture
transaction details relating to the vehicle and the specific TTPS Credit Card.
New System — the new system is the fleet card process whereby each driver would now be
assigned a Credit card whilst on duty to fuel the assigned vehicles.
Fuel — means gasoline and/or diesoline.
Service Station — service station refers to all NP and Unipet Stations that sell fuel in
Trinidad and Tobago.
Card Limit - Each card has an approved daily limit of Four Hundred Dollars ($400.00) for
vehicles that use Diesoline and Eight Hundred Dollars ($800.00) for vehicles that use
gasoline.
Card Co-ordinator — The Card Co-coordinator is an officer of the Treasury Division who
distributes the card to the TTPS Fleet Card Manager.
Comptroller of Accounts - Is the senior accountant of the government organization
TTPS Fleet Card Manager — The TTPS Fleet Card Manager has overall responsibility for
the management of Fleet Cards for the TTPS.
Divisional Fleet Card Manager - The Divisional Fleet Card Manager is the First Division
Officer assigned with the responsibility for Fleet Cards in the Division/Section/
/Unit/Branch. In instances where there is no First Division Officer, the most senior Second
Division Officer should be assigned as the Divisional Fleet Card Manager.
Vehicles —means any form of transportation used by the TTPS that consume Gasoline or
Dieseline.
Fleet Card Registers — Is a book where officers will record the vehicle registration number,
date and time of receipt of card, type of card and card number.
Fleet Card Assignment Register — the Fleet Card Assignment Register is use to record the
movement of fleet cards by persons to whom it is issued.

eee


--- page break ---

78/3
Chit books - Chit Books are prepared in quadruplicate to be used for the detailing of the
vehicle registration number, type of fuel, quantity, cost and the address of the service station.
It shall be signed by both the driver and the station attendant on completion of a point of
sale.
Vehicle Log Book- is use to account/record mileage used by each vehicle on a daily basis.
3. Overview of the Fleet Card Facility
3.1. The Fleet Card Facility allows the TTPS to purchase fuel from any service station outlet in
Trinidad and Tobago with a Credit card; the Credit card will be coded to capture transaction
details relating to the vehicle and the specific TTPS Credit Card.
4. Types of Fleet Cards
4.1. There are various types of cards for specific purposes as detailed below:
a. ‘Fuel for marked vehicles’ Card
This card is used for a specific vehicle at any service station and allows for the purchase of
fuel for only up to the pre-determined limit.
b. ‘Container’ Card
This card is used for fuel trucks owned by TTPS and allows for the purchase of fuel for
generators and machinery. The SDO in charge of the department must request a value on
the Card sufficient to fill the fuel truck, stating also the frequency with which the truck
obtains fuel.
c. ‘Fuel for Rented/Leased/Unmarked Vehicles’ Card
This card is used for rented, leased and/or unmarked vehicles and _ shall be valid for a period
of four years from the date of issue.
5. Card Limit
5.1. Each card has an approved daily limit of Four Hundred Dollars ($400.00) for vehicles that
use Diesoline and Eight Hundred Dollars ($800.00) for vehicles that use gasoline. For an
increase in the card limit, a request must be submitted to the Comptroller of Accounts. The
request must include justification and must be signed by the Commissioner of Police.
A /4


--- page break ---

78/4

6. Arrangements for Acquisition, Use, Recording and Monitoring of the Fleet Card

6.1. The Card Co-coordinator is an officer of the Treasury Division. The Commissioner of Police
shall designate an officer to be the overall TTPS Fleet Card Manager. Where there are
changes to the TTPS Fleet Card Manager, written notification of the change must be
provided to the Card Co-ordinator.

6.2. The Head of each Division, Section, Station Unit and Branch must designate a Departmental
Fleet Card Manager for that Divisional/Section/station/Unit/Branch.

7. Request for Fleet Cards

7.1. TTPS Fleet Card Manager is required to submit a request for cards for each vehicle in the
TTPS to the Card Co-coordinator. The request must include:

a. The name of the TTPS Fleet Card Manager, along with specimen signatures;

b. The names of Divisional Fleet Card Managers, where the vehicles are posted, and

c. | Anexcel worksheet in the format specified at Appendix IT. A soft copy must also be
submitted to the following e-mail account: TreasuryDiv.FleetCard@gov.tt.

7.2. Care must be taken to ensure that the information provided with respect to vehicles must be
accurate and up-to-date as this will be used by the bank to create a database to facilitate
the issue of the Fleet Cards. The Officer will be held responsible for the cost of any
unauthorized/fraudulent transaction arising from incorrect information supplied.

7.3. In respect of rented, leased and/or unmarked vehicles, you are required to assign a unique
alpha-numeric code in the column for “Vehicle Registration Number (example cp001)” on
the worksheet. This code will be reflected on the card to allow for data capture and
monitoring of expenditure patterns.

7.4. The Divisional Fleet Card Managers are to make requests for additional fleet cards to the
TTPS Fleet Card Manager where necessary.

7.5. The TTPS Fleet Card Manager is to make requests to the Card Co-coordinator for any
additional cards.

7.6. The Card Co-coordinator shall notify the TTPS Fleet Card Manager when the fleet cards are
ready for collection.

wovdleh


--- page break ---

78/5

8. Distribution, Recording, Control and Monitoring of Cards

8.1. The TTPS Fleet Card Manager shall collect the Fleet Card from the card Co- coordinator
and distribute same to the Divisional Fleet Card Manager of the relevant
Division/Section/Unit/ Branch.

8.2. The Divisional Fleet Card Manager the Division/Section/Unit/ //Branch shall distribute the
Fleet Cards to the relevant Second Division Officer in-charge (SDO i/c) of the relevant
Division/Section/Unit/Station//Branch where the vehicle is assigned.

9. The TTPS Fleet Card Manager, Divisional Fleet Card Managers and the SDO i/c of the
Division/Section/Unit/Station/Branch shall update and maintain a Fleet Card Register of all
Fleet Cards issued to facilitate the management and control of Fleet Cards.

9.1. The Fleet Card Register shall record the vehicle registration number, date of receipt of card,
type of card and card number. (Appendix II).

9.2. The Fleet Card Assignment Register shall be maintained to capture details as to the
assignment of the Fleet Card. (Appendix IV).

9.3. Fleet Cards are to be kept in a locked fire-proof cabinet. No unauthorized personnel should
have access to the Fleet Cards.

10. Bank Statements

10.1. The bank shall provide daily, weekly and monthly on-line statements to the Treasury
Division, the TTPS Fleet Card Manager, the Divisional Fleet Card Manager and the SDO
i/e.

10.2. The persons mentioned at paragraph 8.1 will be authorized to access bank statements relating
to the TTPS via a secured website. Each person would be provided with a username and
password. Statements shall be analyzed in conjunction with the chit books and Point-of-Sale
(POS) receipts to ensure the validity of the purchase.

11. Use of the Fleet Card

11.1. A Fleet Card shall be issued to the Driver of each TTPS vehicle by the SDO i/c officer in
charge of the Shift. This Fleet Card shall be used by the authorized TTPS driver to purchase
fuel for official purposes only.

11.2. The Fleet card shall be used in conjunction with the existing (Chit Book) for purchasing
fuel. However, the chits will no longer be retained by the service station but by the driver.

evil


--- page break ---

78/6

11.3. The SDO in charge of the shift (or the next senior second division officer present) shall
ensure that the Fleet Card Assignment Register is completed as shown in Appendix IV.

11.4. The Driver must present the Fleet Card together with the Chit Book at the service station.
He/she must swipe the card at the Point-of-Sale (POS) terminal to effect the purchase and
will be provided with a POS receipt.

11.5. The Driver shall then complete the Chit Book, detailing the vehicle registration number, fuel
type and quantity, cost and POS receipt transaction number. The completed chit shall then
be signed by both the driver and the service station attendant.

11.6. Upon return to the station/Division/Section/Unit/Branch the Driver shall promptly submit
the fleet card, original completed chit of each transaction together with the relevant POS
receipt attached, to the SDO in charge of the shift (or the next senior second division officer
present).

11.7. The SDO in charge of the shift (or the next senior second division officer present) shall
update the Fleet Card Register and secure the Fleet Card.

11.8. The SDO in charge of the shift (or the next senior second division officer present) shall
ensure that transactions were authorized, chits were properly completed, verify the
information against point of sales receipt and then ‘certify correct’ on the back of the chit.

11.9. The Driver is required to maintain the Vehicle Log Book in the normal manner pursuant to
Standing Order 49, Section 5.

11.10. Where the SDO in charge of the shift (or the next senior second division officer present)

determines that any unauthorized transactions were conducted, he/she must inform the
SDO i/e of the station/Division/Section/Unit/Branch immediately and a follow up in
writing within twenty-four (24) hours, a record of same shall be made in the Station Diary.

11.11. The SDO in charge of the shift (or the next senior second division officer present) shall
retain and secure the Chits and POS receipt for reconciliation purposes.

11.12. The SDO i/c shall verify and reconcile the completed chits and POS receipts submitted for
each Fleet Card transaction with the vehicle log book on a weekly basis.

11.13. The SDO i/c shall reconcile the expenses on the chits and point of sale receipt with the
FCB database online by logging on to the FCB website using the username and password
provided.

veal


--- page break ---

78/7

11.14. The SDO i/c shall submit a spreadsheet showing all Fleet Card activities for a given week
by the 1“ working day of the following week to the Divisional Fleet Card Manager. All
relevant POS receipts and the Chits shall be attached.

11.15. The Divisional Fleet Card Manager shall prepare a return showing a summary of all Fleet
Card transactions and a detailed excel spreadsheet attached for each fortnight in his/her
Division/Section/Unit/Branch.

11.16. The Divisional Fleet Card Manager shall submit the summary and spreadsheet of all Fleet
card transactions to the TTPS Fleet Card Manager fortnightly by the Wednesday of the
following fortnight. All relevant POS receipts and the Chits shall be attached.

11.17. The TTPS Fleet Card Manager shall review all spreadsheets submitted showing
expenditure and reconcile with the FCB statement. The TTPS Fleet Card manager shall
verify that all relevant documentation is submitted to support payments.

11.18. The TTPS Fleet Card Manager Shall then prepares a statement to the Head Administration
indicating the expenditure incurred for the month as well as any problems or issues
encountered.

11.19. The Head Administration shall then forward to the Commissioner of Police a report for
final approval.

12. Fraudulent/Unauthorized Transactions or Lost/Stolen/Damaged Cards

12.1. The driver authorized to use the Fleet Card shall be held liable for any fraudulent/
unauthorized transaction or lost/stolen/damaged Fleet Card.

12.2. The SDO in charge of the shift (or the next senior second division officer present) shall
report immediately any fraudulent/unauthorized transactions or any lost/damaged/stolen
card to the SDO i/c. A written report shall then be submitted within twenty-four (24) hours
(or the next working day) to the SDO i/c. The SDO in charge of the shift (or the next senior
second division officer present) shall note same in the station diary.

12.3. The SDO i/c shall immediately report any fraudulent/unauthorized transactions or any
lost/damaged/stolen card to the Divisional Fleet Card Manager. A written report is to
follow within twenty-four (24) hours (or the next working day) to the Divisional Fleet Card
Manager.

vivel®


--- page break ---

78/8

12.4. The Divisional Fleet Card Manager shall then immediately inform the Senior
Superintendent of the Division/Section/unit/Branch of the fraudulent/unauthorized

12.5. Transactions or any lost/damaged/stolen cards. A written report is to follow within twenty-
four (24) hours (or the next working day) to the Senior Superintendent.

12.6. The Senior Superintendent shall then immediately inform the TTPS Fleet Card Manager
of the fraudulent/unauthorized transactions or any lost/damaged/stolen cards. A written
report is to follow within twenty-four (24) hours (or the next working day) to the TTPS
Fleet Card Manager.

12.7. The TTPS Fleet Card Manager shall then immediately inform the Card Co-coordinator of
the lost. stolen or damaged cards. A written report must also be sent to the Card Co-
coordinator.

12.8. The cost of replacement of the card as well as any loss arising from the misuse of a card
will be borne by the TTPS.

13. Help Desk Service

13.1. All TTPS personnel will have access to the FCB’s 24/7 Help Desk Service to facilitate
enquiries in cases where they encounter problems when using the Fleet Cards at the service
stations.

14. — Station Visits

14.1. It shall be the duty of all First Division Officer and Inspector when visiting a
Station/Division/Branch/Unit/Section to examine and initial principal registers including:
e Vehicle Log Book
e Fleet Cards
e Fleet Card Register
e Point of Sale Receipts
e Chits from Chit Book
e Fleet Card Assignment Register

wld


--- page break ---

78/9
APPENDIX |
FLEET CARD REGISTER
VEHICLE CARD DATE OF CARD CARD NAME OF
REGISTRATION | NUMBER RECEIPT OF | TYPE LIMIT | AUTHORIZED
NUMBER CARD DRIVER
svi /10


--- page break ---

78/10
APPENDIX II
FLEET CARD ASSIGNMENT REGISTER
DATE VEHICLE CARD NAME SIGNATURE | DATEAND | SIGNATURE
REGISTRATION | NUMBER OF OF TIME CARD OF FLEET
NUMBER AUTHORIZED | AUTHORIZED | RETURNED | MANAGER
DRIVER DRIVER
PART Il - NIL
Commissioner of Police
