Intention: 
Police Orders by 
Commissioner of Police 
Police Administration Building 
Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets 
Port of Spain 
Monday 11lh January 2010 
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian 
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press) 
Departmental Order PART I- Nil 
PART IT 
General Occurrence Incident Report ''R" Forms are, now integrated in the 
Trinidad and Tobago Police Service. However, there must be greater 
accountability as it relates to the use, review and storage of the General 
Occurrence Incident Report (GOIR) "R" Forms. Therefore, First 
Division and Second Division Officers when visiting stations are to ensure 
that they are part of the inspection process. 
The following amendments to the Standing Orders will now take effect to 
achieve the desired objective: 
Amendments: Standing Order No. 13 paragraph 12, sub-paragraph 1 (b) is amended to 
include General Occurrence Incident Report "R" Forms. 
Standing Order No. 13 Appendix Al, paragraphs 11 (a) and (b), 20, 
22, 27 (a) and 29 (a) and (e) are amended as indicated:-
(a) Serious Crimes 
State the number of reported serious crimes, detections and completions I 
convictions for the year to date by utilizing the Trinidad and Tobago 
Police Service (TTPS) Database. Give a comparative figure for the 
corresponding period for the previous year. Submission of General 
Occurrence Incident Report "R" Forms. Proper classification. Submission 
of Fingerprint slips. Submission of results of cases. Recording of 
statements from victims. Submission of dockets /files. 
(i) Minor Crimes 
State the number of reported minor crimes, detections and completions I 
convictions for the year to date by utilizing the Trinidad and Tobago 
Police Service (TTPS) Database. Give a comparative figure for the 
corresponding period for the previous year. Submission of General 
Occurrence Incident Report "R" Forms. Proper classification. Submission 
of fingerprint slips. Submission of results of cases. Recording of 
statements from victims. Submission of dockets I files . 
. . ./2 



7/2 
(ii) Minor Offences 
State the number of reported minor offences, detections and completions I 
convictions for the year to date by utilizing the Trinidad and Tobago 
Police Service (TTPS) Database. Give a comparative figure for the 
corresponding period for the previous year. Submission of General 
Occurrence Incident Report "R" Fonns. Proper classification. Submission 
of fingerprint slips. Submission of results of cases. Recording of 
statements from victims. Submission of dockets /files. 
(b) Minor Offence Domestic Violence 
State the number of reported minor offences domestic violence, 
detections, completions I convictions for the year to date by utilizing the 
Trinidad and Tobago Police Service (TTPS) Database. Give a 
comparative figure for the corresponding period for the previous year. 
Submission of General Occurrence Incident Report "R" Forms. Proper 
classification. Submission of fingerprint slips. Submission of results of 
cases. Recording of statements from victims. Submission of dockets /files. 
(c) GeneraJ Occurrences I Other Matters 
State the number of reported general occurrences and other matters 
completed I closed for the year to date by utilizing the Trinidad and 
Tobago Police Service (TTPS) Database. Give a comparative figure for 
the corresponding period for the previous year. Submission of General 
Occurrence Incident Report "R" Fonns. Proper classification. 
20. Missing Persons: 
State whether there are any reports of missing persons, kidnapped and 
located by utilizing the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service Database. 
Submission of General Occurrence Incident Report "R" Forms. Proper 
classification. 
Verify that the instructions in accordance with the relevant Standing 
Orders are carried out. 
22. Occurrence Register: 
State the number of occurrences that have taken place for the year to date 
and what action has been taken with respect to each report by utilizing the 
Trinidad and Tobago Police Service Database. Submission of General 
Occurrence Incident Report "R" Forms. Proper classification. Verify that 
the instructions in accordance with the relevant Standing Orders are 
carried out. 
.. ./3 



7/3 
27. Process: Warrants 
(a) State the number of the different type of warrants that are in the 
possession of the Warrant Officer. Ensure that each warrant is entered in 
the Warrant register. Submit warrants for data capture via warrant data 
capture form for data entry. State what efforts are made to have warrants 
executed by carrying out random checks on Warrant History Sheets 
against the Warrant Register, entries in the Station Diary and entries in the 
Trinidad and Tobago Police Service Database. Verify that the instructions 
in accordance with the relevant Standing Orders are carried out. 
29. Road Traffic Accidents: 
(a) state the number of reports of Road Traffic Accidents for the year to 
date by utilizing the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service Database. 
Submission of General Occurrence Incident Report "R" Forms. Proper 
classification under the following heads: .... .. . 
(e) give a detailed list of reports of Road Traffic Accidents that are statute 
barred, giving the number of the Road Traffic Accident files and the name 
of the Investigators by utilizing the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service 
(TTPS) Database. 
In addition, the aforementioned General Occurrence Incident Report "R" 
Forms shall have a destruction life span as other books and registers in the 
Trinidad and Tobago Police Service. Therefore, Standing Order No. 52 is 
hereby amended as follows: 
• Standing Order No. 52, paragraphs 1,2 & 4 are amended to include 
General Occurrence Incident Report "R" Forms. 
• Standing Order No. 52 paragraph 5 is amended to include paragraph 
4 (j), General Occurrence Incident Report "R" Forms: -
Securing Forms The Second Division Officer (Sergeant) in charge at every Station is 
responsible for the safety and security of the General Occurrence Incident 
Report (GOIR) "R" Forms. Additionally, in accordance with Standing 
Order No. 52, these GOIR forms shall be destroyed only by a First 
Division Officer. 
The above amendments are in support ofDepartmental order #254/06. As 
the Commissioner of Police, I expect that these amendments will be acted 
upon in the strictest sense. This would ensure that the new Crime and 
Incident Reporting System is effective, thereby supporting intelligence-led 
policing initiatives in the transformation of the Trinidad and Tobago 
Police Service. 