| Police Orders by Mr. Trevor Paul 1 | '
Pela Commissioner of Police boy sf Wi |
Police Administration Building hit Lote dy |
Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets ‘
Port-of-Spain:
Wednesday 18"" January, 2006
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the press)
No.8 Departmental Order ~ PART I- NIL
PART - I
TRANSFORMATION OF THE POLICE SERVICE
TRAINING INITIATIVES.
1. INFORMATION
1:1 Training for Front-Line Leaders 2
Training for Police Officers as Front Line Leaders has been
highlighted as one of the key areas in the transformation initiative
of the Police Service. In that regard, the Pennsylvania State
University has been contracted to develop training programmes
and provide support services to enhance the management capacity
: of police supervisors and senior managers of the Police Service.

1:2 These programmes are based on information provided to the
resource personnel of the Pennsylvania State University during
their several fact-finding missions. The data has since been
customized to suit the police environment and in particular, to

meet the local needs of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service.
The programmes therefore are not foreign oriented but specific to
the training needs identified.

— 1:3 In a general sense, the course of training is designed to train
supervisors at different levels of administration and management
within the hierarchy of the Police Service. Thus, it seeks to target
initially, officers at the middle management level as well as young
officers who demonstrate the aptitude for leadership within the
organization.


--- page break ---

08/2 :
1:4 . Heads of Divisions/Senior Managers shall undergo.a similar course
» of training to acquaint them with the contents of the programme.
_ This, exposure will allow them to. set targets for supervisor’s job-
- achievement consistent with’ their learning. In this way,, senior
managers can provide supervisors with challenges to help them
remain focused in order to sustain the knowledge gained from the
programme, k to
Ultimately,, it is hoped that this ‘approach will result in the
) development of a Compstat Model for holding officers responsible
and accountable for their performance along the set of performance
measures, standards and criteria agreed upon in the redesigned
performance management system

ES Training Programmes

Three (3) strategic areas of training have been developed for
delivery.

(1) The High Impact Supervision;

(2) The Polex Programme

(3) The Train the Trainer Programme.

1:6 - The High Impact Supervision Programme is designed to address
training for Front-Line officers at stations. It is an intensive
training programme that will equip frontline leaders with skills and
attributes to successfully manage an over changing work force
environment. The programme will combine a range of specific
topics like: Principles of Management, Theories of Motivation,
Manpower Planning, Managing Organizational Change,
Customer Relations and Quality Service, Emotional
Management, Performance Appraisal, Managing Stress and
Difficult Employees and Ethics among other areas.

1:7. The Polex Programme, which consists of two (2) modules, Polex
and Advanced Polex, is designed for First Division officers and
other aspirants to the First Division. This programme would assist
officers in Strategic Decision-Making, Long-Term Planning and
assessing 'Unit Performance for officers to be trained. Topics shall
include Strategic Planning, Applying Problem Oriented Policing
Techniques, Instilling Ethical Behaviour and Customer Driven
Performance among. Subordinates, Critical Policy Development
and Self-Actualization, Techniques for Managing Major Incidents,
Dealing with the Media, Developing Subordinate Skills and Career
Paths and Symposia with Other Law Enforcement Leaders among
others.

13


--- page break ---

1:8 The Train the Trainer Module is particularly designed to expose
participants to make the best use of resources in the training of personnel
in a variety of different disciplines. Among other things, it will seek to (1)
Establish positive learning experience (2) Add key learner characteristics
in giving instructions (3) Illustrate the learning environment and
communication practices for effective instructions (4) Emphasize how to
be credible when giving instructions (5) Underline expectations of
instructions
1:9 The training package conducted by the Pennsylvania State
University will emphasize inter alia: - the Roles and
Responsibilities of Supervisors, Styles of Leadership, the need for
, Accountability, the effective use of Feedback, Performance Appraisal,
Counselling of Subordinates, Dealing with Problem Employees,
Promoting Good Customer Service and other topics relative to
Supervision.
2. INTENTION
- 2:1 The intention of this order is to apprize all members of the Police
Service about the three (3) major programmes that police officers are being
exposed to- The “High Impact Supervision Course, The Polex
Programme and The Train The Trainer Programme”. It will explain in
some brief details the depth and design of the selected programmes.
For instance, in the area of Management Skills, the programme identifies
three (3) critical components that an organization must possess at
various levels. At the lower supervisory level there is the need for a greater
degree of Technical and Human Skills with a small amount of Conceptual
Skills to do the job. At the middle management there is the need for a
greater degree of Human Skills coupled with a moderate amount of
Technical and Conceptual Skills. However, at the Top Management more
Human and Conceptual Skills are required.
2:2 These skills are summarized as outlined hereunder: -
Technical Skills
e Reviews reports for accuracy, thoroughness and answers questions
relating to department quality, policies, rules and regulations.
e Conducts training and demonstrates all tasks to be performed.
e Directs subordinates at the scene of incidents.
.../4


--- page break ---

| 3 08/4
2:3 Human Skills 2
® ‘Deals with subordinates as individuals, based on their
competency and commitment.
e Listens and discusses problems with subordinates.
e Identifies and informs subordinates when they have not met
performance standards.
e Motivates subordinates to perform at their very best.
2:4 Conceptual Skills
e Identifies emerging problems and works towards their
resolutions.
e Demonstrates the ability to analyze data and make decisions.
* Develop plans for any project to be considered and executed.
e Conceptualizes the technical and human aspect of the work
environment.
2:5 The Train the Trainer Module has as its main objectives the
following: -

© To identify the characteristics of a positive learning

experience and explain the concept of learning styles as key
; principles of adult learning.

e Describes the key learner characteristics that the instructor
should consider in adapting instructions to fit a diverse
learner population.

e Explains the communications model, its relationship to the
learning environment and communication practices that are
favourable for effective instructions.

¢ To identify and explain the importance or credibility and
steps you can take to establish and enhance your
credibilties in instruction.

e To identify and explain the preparation needed for

introducing and establishing the expectations of your
instructions.
3. METHODOLOGY

3:1 Training Sessions for The High Impact Supervisory programme
will be conducted from Monday to Friday with each programme
commencing 8.30a.m. on Mondays and Wednesdays. The project
assumes an average enrollment of thirty (30) / thirty-five (35)
participants for each session or a maximum of not more than forty
(40).


--- page break ---

08/5 «|
3:2 The initial sessions will serve as pilot projects, so as to accommodate,
if required, any further programme customization by Pennsylvania
State University. Eight hundred (800) Police Officers shall attend
, this programme and will each receive a “Certificate of
Participation”.
3:3. Police Executive and Mid-Management Training

3:3:1 Training will be focused towards two hundred (200) mid and senior
management personnel of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service.
The Pennsylvania State lecturers will ensure that the training
provided best fits the needs of the Police Service.

3:3:2 This training is structured in a manner that ensures effective delivery
in a mutual agreement. The duration of the programme is still to be
developed.

3:4. Train-the-Trainer & Customer Services

3:4:1 Pennsylvania State University will provide a Train-the-Trainer
programme for seventy-five (75) Police Officers. All train-the-
trainer sessions will include segments on how to serve as a trainer
for others within the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service. All
participants will be taught how to be more effective as a trainer, i.e.

(developing learning goals, developing lesson plans etc.). This
- programme will run for five (5) consecutive days, usually
commencing from Monday.

4. ADMINISTRATION

4:1 SUPERVISION
. 4:1:1 The Deputy Commissioner of Police “Strategic Planning &
Development” will be directly responsible for the overall
supervision of these courses.
. 4:2 TRAINING
4:2:1 Training will be provided for members of the Police Service in the
following categories:-
(a) The Executive
(b) First Division Officers
(c) Second Division Officers
- PART Jil - NIL
. _
