ets Police Orders by Mr. Gary Griffith
x Commissioner of Police
vw Police Administration Building
2 — Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
Provecr ane SS Port of Spain
Thursday 17" April 2019
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian Employees
of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
No. 80 Departmental Order PART 1 - NIL
PART II
RE- ESTABLISHMENT and RE- ORGANIZATION OF THE LEGAL UNIT
Departmental Order No. 108 of 2007 is hereby rescinded with immediate effect and
replaced with the following Departmental Order.

§ GENERAL INFORMATION

1.1 The Commissioner of Police and the management of the Trinidad and Tobago Police
Service has re-established and re-organized a newly transformed Legal Unit in the
Service with effect from Thursday 17" April 2019, as part of the ongoing transformation
process.

1.2 There shall be a Director of Legal who shall report to the Commissioner of Police and
there shall be established an Office of the Director Legal Services and Legal Unit.

1.3 The Director of Legal shall be responsible for the overall management and operation of
the Legal Unit, which shall include, Legal Officers, Staff of the Monitoring and
Compliance Unit, Business Office Assistants, Support and Administrative Staff.

1.3. The Legal Officers of the Legal Unit shall consist of persons who are qualified as
Attorneys at Law ONLY and who are assigned to the Legal Unit by the Commissioner of
Police or the Director of Legal.

1.4 The Commissioner of Police or The Director of Legal shall assign Legal Officers to each
Division, Branch and Specialist Units/Sections in the Trinidad and Tobago Police
Service.

1.5 The Trinidad and Tobago Police Service has a fundamental duty to establish support
systems, methods and structures to effectively manage its human, material and financial
resources.

1


--- page break ---

2. INTENTION
The intention of this Departmental Order is to apprise members of the Trinidad and
Tobago Police Service of the re- establishment and re- organization of the Legal Unit,
thus transforming the service into a more efficient and effective organization.

3. ADMINISTRATION

| Legal Officers attached to Divisions/Branches and Specialist Units/Sections shall
perform legal duties as set out hereinafter appearing or any other duties assigned ONLY,
unless otherwise directed by the Commissioner of Police or Director of Legal.

3.2 Legal Officers SHALL NOT engage in private contentious matters and shall not appear
in any Court in any jurisdiction unless it is on behalf of the Commissioner of Police or
the State.

3.3. Heads of Divisions/ Branches and Specialist Units/ Sections shall ensure that ALL
Freedom of Information (FOI) requests are fulfilled within the time frame in accordance
with requests received from the Legal Unit.

3.4 Heads of Divisions/Branches and Specialist Units/ Sections shall ensure that proper
accommodation, including office facilities, furniture and other relevant materials, are
provided to Legal Officers under their command.

4. FUNCTIONS OF LEGAL OFFICERS

4.1 Legal Officers shall perform the following functions;-

« Attend Court and represent the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and
the Commissioner of Police when delegated;

* Attend Disciplinary Tribunals and represent the Trinidad and Tobago
Police Service and the Commissioner of Police when delegated;

* Prepare and draft legal opinions and submissions when required to do so;

" Prepare and draft correspondence when required to do so;

" Receive Freedom of Information (FOI) requests from the legal unit and
fulfill same within the stipulated time periods.

" Assist Police Prosecutors in the Magistrates’ Court with cases that involve
technical/difficult legal issues.

* Assist in the training of Police Prosecutors.

* Lecture to members of the Police Service on legal matters relevant to the
Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and assist in the preparation of legal

2


--- page break ---

training materials and programmes for the Police Training
College/Academy.

* Draft Part II Orders for the Commissioner of Police.

* Assist/guide police officers with regards to offences and the ingredients
necessary to establish same, together with the legal requirements in the
conduct of such investigations, thereby increasing the possibility/chance
of successful prosecution of these offences.

« Screen and assist in the preparation of case files for transmission to the
Office of the Director of Public Prosecution thereby improving their
quality.

* Assist Police Officers in the preparation of documents for paper committal
proceedings.

* Any other duty assigned by the Commissioner of Police or Director of
Legal.

5. ESTABLISHMENT OF COMPLIANCE AND MONITORING UNIT
There shall be established under the command and portfolio of the Legal Unit, a
Compliance and Monitoring Unit.

5.2 Key Objectives: To create a Unit made up of police officers and civilian staff to fulfill the
following duties or as may be delegated from time to time under the directions of the
Director of Legal, namely:

I. To follow up on Freedom of Information (FOI) requests, respond to requests and ensure
that compliance or refusal of such requests are fulfilled within the requisite statutory time
frame or to seek an extension of time in appropriate circumstances.

Methodology: Weekly and daily communication with Divisions, Branches and Specialist
Units/ Sections via email, official correspondence, official telephone messages and phone
calls.

Rationale: This is intended to avoid unnecessary Judicial Review actions being instituted
against the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and by extension the Commissioner of
Police for failure to adhere to their statutory duty.

II. | To comprehensively trace, track and report on all Court matters, which shall be divided
into different categories, namely: Judgments to be Executed, Matters for Trial, Existing
Matters and New Matters.

3


--- page break ---

Methodology: Members of the Unit shall be assigned to the various matters to ensure that
everything, which is required to be fulfilled on the part of the Commissioner of Police, is
completed in a timely manner for Court. These shall include, assisting in disclosure of
documents, making copies, attending Court and making copious notes of the progress of
the assigned cases, as well as comments by the judicial officers.

Rationale: To efficiently and effectively manage the systemic flow of legal actions taken
against the Commissioner of Police, in matters of promotion, sick leave classifications
and Freedom of Information (FOI) requests. It will also seek to address incidents of
negative adverse rulings, which may possess the ability to have a damning effect on the
Trinidad and Tobago Police Service, and which ought to be limited by the
implementation of proper case management.

III. To monitor all media reports whether electronic, print or otherwise, wherein adverse
reports are made about errant police officers acting upon a frolic of their own.
Methodology: Using all forms of media and closely monitoring for infractions by police
officers. Thereafter, a report is prepared along with legal advice and sent to the
Commissioner of Police for the implementation of disciplinary proceedings against the
offending police officer.

Rationale; To significantly reduce and subsequently eradicate all arbitrary, corrupt and
reckless practices of police officers.

IV. To vigorously monitor Magistrates Court matters which are dismissed for the non-
appearance of police complainants.

Methodology: The staff of the Unit shall comprehensively track and report on all
Magistrates’ Court matters whilst also consulting with Court Prosecutors and in
particular, paying special attention to matters in which Police Complainants habitually
fail to attend court. Once a matter is discharged for want of prosecution owing to the non-
attendance of a Police Complainant, a report will be prepared by the staff of the Unit
along with a report from the Police Court Prosecutor, who shall produce same
immediately upon the request of the staff of the Unit. These reports shall be submitted for
the attention of the Commissioner of Police to take the appropriate action.

4


--- page break ---

Rationale: Too many matters are falling by the wayside due to the non-appearance of
police officers at Court, which is a direct dereliction of their duty, particularly when
attending Court is the duty of the utmost importance.

6. COMMUNICATION

6.1 Heads of Divisions/Branches/Units are to submit to the Director of Legal on a monthly
basis, a return on the work performance and conduct of Legal Officers under their
command.

6.2 Legal Officers, Police Officers and Investigators shall liaise with the office of the
Director of Public Prosecution wherever and whenever so required, but, SHALL NOT
submit files, reports and correspondence directly to the Director of Public Prosecutions
without first submitting same to the Director of Legal for his subsequent approval.

6.3 Heads of Divisions/ Branches/ Units SHALL NOT permit Legal Officers, Police Officers
and Investigators to submit files, reports and correspondence directly to the Director of
Public Prosecutions without first submitting same to the Director of Legal for his
subsequent approval.

7. CONCLUSION
The Re- establishment and re- organization of this unit will significantly enhance the
management of the Police Service, thus improving its crime fighting capability as well as
optimize the efficiency and effectiveness of the legal unit in the Trinidad and Tobago
Police Service, thereby promoting confidence and regaining public trust.

PART II —NIL
Commissioner of Police
5
