Sy Police Orders by
i Commissioner of Police
AS Police Administration Building
aN; si Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
nab WRAES PIC Se Port of Spain
70
Promec pun 3 Tuesday 12" June, 2018
WITH PRIDE 7
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian

employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)

No. 80 Departmental Order PART I—NIL
PART II
RE: Act 19 of 2007 — Amendment to the Motor Vehicles and Road Traffic Act, Chap 48:50
Breathalyzer Instruments and Procedures
(1) In this Order :-
“accuracy check” is a quality control measure for breath testing devices as per manufacturer’s instructions
on instruments approved by the minister.
“approved devices keeper” is a police officer of the rank of Corporal and above who is a Certified Breath
Analysis Technician.
“approved devices” means the instrument approved by Order issued by the Minister with responsibility
for Transport and used to measure the concentration of alcohol present in a suspected persons breath in
accordance with section 70B (9) & 70C (13) of the Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic Act.
“authorized officer” means a Police Constable who has been authorized by the Minister responsible for
National Security to operate instruments prescribed for the carrying out of the breath analysis.
“breath analysis” is the same as outlined under section 70G (1) of the Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic
Act and is defined as “the quantitative measuring of the proportion of alcohol in a persons breath, carried
out by means of a device prescribed for the purpose by the Ministry with responsibility for Transport.
“breath test” means is the same as outlined under section 70G (1) of the Motor Vehicle and Road Traffic
Act and is defined as “the test for the purpose of obtaining an indication of the proportion of alcohol in the
person’s breath carried out by means of a device approved for the purpose of such a test by Minister with
responsibility for Transport.
“calibration” is a procedure which sets the device to a known standard value;
“custodian” means a First Division Officer appointed by Division/Branch/Section Commander to be the
manager of all approved devices.
vnvuk


--- page break ---

80/2
“constable” carries the same meaning as under the revised section 70G (1) of the Motor Vehicle and Road
Traffic Act.
“consumables” refers to all equipment necessary for the effective and accurate use of the approved breath
testing devices as per manufacturers requirements.
“D.U.I” refers to Driving Under the Influence of alcohol.
Identification, Requisition and Recording of Breathalyzer Equipment
(2) All breath testing instruments shall be permanently marked with a Trinidad and Tobago Police
Service (TTPS) number as identified in Appendix A.
(3) The Senior Superintendent Finance Branch shall be responsible for the requisition of all
approved devices and consumables.
(4) The Senior Superintendent Finance Branch shall cause a record to be kept of all approved
devices issued to the Police service noting specifically —
1) The serial number and corresponding TTPS number of each instrument;
2) The date of issue to the Police Service;
3) The Division/Branch/Section to which each instrument has been assigned;
4) The date of assignment to the Division/Branch/Section.
Record Keeping of List of Authorized Officers in the TTPS
(5) The Assistant Commissioner of Police (ACP) Mobile shall be provided with an updated
nominal role of all authorized officers attached to the TTPS by the Senior Superintendent of
the Police Training Academy on the first week of January and first week of July every year.
a) This list shall reflect the following:
e The number, rank and name of the officer
e The Division Section, Branch, Unit he is attached
e Validation period of Training i.e. — Date of Course and Expiration Date
e Certificate Number issued from the Minister of National Security


--- page break ---

80/3
(6) The Senior Superintendent Police Training Academy shall have responsibility for the
following —

1. Training of all Police Constables in the use and operation of all approved devices.

2. Submit to the Commissioner of Police a nominal role of all successfully trained
officers for transmission to the Minister of National Security for authorization
certificates.

3. Retaining a copy of all authorized certificates issued by Minister of National Security.

4. Provide an updated nominal role of all authorized officers to the
Division/Branch/Section Commanders upon request.

5. Appoint wherever necessary a Liaison officer(s) to assist the Division/Branch/Section
Commanders in effective implementation of procedures, equipment evaluation and
ensure compliance with this order.

Breathalyzer Equipment Management

(7) The Commander in Charge of a Division/Branch/Section shall appoint a Custodian for a
Division/Branch/Section.

(8) The Custodian shall appoint an Approved Devices Keeper at each
Station/Section/Branch/Unit where the approved devices have been issued or kept.

(a) The Approved Devices Keeper handing over responsibility for the management and

custody of approved devices shall transfer all approved devices under his control, along

with all supplies of consumables, files, records and registers related to the management and
custody of the approved devices, to the officer assigned with that responsibility.

(b) It shall be the duty of both the Approved Devices Keeper handing over and the

officer taking over to make a physical check of all the approved devices, consumables,

files, records and registers assigned to the Division/Branch/Section, Unit noting in
particular the serial and TTPS numbers and the condition of the approved devices and
consumables.

(c) It shall be the duty of the Approved Devices Keeper handing over and the officer

taking over to prepare a “Handover” in a manner set out in Appendix “B”.

(d) The “Handover” shall be prepared in quadruplicate, each officer retaining a copy, one

copy filed in the Division/Branch/Section’s administrative office and one copy forwarded

to the Custodian.
wn /4


--- page break ---

80/4
(9) The Approved Device Keeper shall:

a) Keep arecord of each approved device assigned to his Station/Branch/Section/Unit
recording the TTPS Number and Serial Number.

b) Maintain a calibration/accuracy check log book for each approved device used for
breath testing and breath analysis as set out in Appendix C;

c) Keep a record of Consumables issued to his Station/Branch/Section/Unit;

d) Make and application as necessary to the Senior Superintendent Finance Branch
via the Custodian for re-issue of any associated consumables as listed in Appendix
D:

e) Keep an adequate number of approved devices in reserve and under his control;

f) Keep under his care and control all supplies of consumables;

g) Conduct an Accuracy Check of each approved device assigned to
Station/Branch/Section/Unit in accordance with the manufacturer’s guidelines and
ensure that the results are recorded in the log book;

h) Conduct a Calibration of each approved device assigned to
Station/Branch/Section/Unit in accordance with the manufacturers guidelines and
ensure that the results are recorded in the log book;

i) Any accuracy check result not within manufacturer’s recommendations will require
the instrument to be calibrated. .

j) Submit a monthly return of (g) and (h) by the second Monday of every month to
the Custodian (Appendix E).

(10) The Senior Police Officer in charge of officers proceeding on or retuning off patrol or
exercise with approved devices and consumables shall-
a) Make an entry in the Station Diary recording the TTPS number of each
approved device together with the amount of consumables issued to each Police
Officer.
ww


--- page break ---

80/5
b) Make an entry in the Station Diary when the Police Officers return off patrol or
exercise, recording the TIPS Number of each approved device returned
together with the amount of consumables used and returned and the number of
tests conducted.
c) Ensure that the General Occurrence Incident Report Forms R1, R2A and
R9A are prepared and submitted to the SDO/IC within 48 hours for
transmission to TTPS data entry personnel.
Repair of Breathalyzer Equipment
11) All Breathalyzer instruments for repair shall be sent to the Senior Superintendent Traffic &
Highway Patrol Branch for logging. It shall be the responsibility of the Senior Superintendent
Traffic & Highway Patrol Branch to cause a record to be kept of all breathalyzer equipment
which is to be sent to the supplier for repair as well as receipt and dispatch of repaired
equipment returned from the supplier to its respective Division/Station/Section/Unit.
12) These records must include:
1) The serial number and corresponding TTPS number of each instrument;
2) The Division/Branch/Section/Unit Station to which each instrument has been
assigned;
3) |The Number Rank and Name of the officer dropping off instruments for repair or
receiving the repaired instrument on behalf of a section/branch/unit/station.
4) The date and time when the instrument was received by the supplier for repair
and/or returned to the TTPS by the supplier.
13) The Senior Superintendent Traffic & Highway Patrol Branch shall be responsible for
verifying and forwarding all necessary documentation including invoices for work done by the
supplier pertaining to repair and maintenance of breathalyzer equipment to the Senior
Superintendent Finance.
../6


--- page break ---

80/6
Procedures to Conduct a Breath Test
14) A Police Officer administering a Breath Test shall-

a) Be trained and certified in a manner approved by the Commissioner of Police;

b) Identify him/herself to the suspected person via his Police Identification Card.

c) Take every precaution to ensure the safety and security of the suspected person,
fellow police officers on the scene and himself, being especially vigilant of the
position of his firearm in relation to the suspected person, risks posed by other
occupants of the vehicle and vehicular traffic on the roadway.

d) Inform the suspected person of any observation which may have been made and
which may have aroused the constable’s reasonable grounds of suspicion;

e) Caution the suspected person and then inform him/her that they are suspected
of driving, attempting to drive or being in charge of a motor vehicle, or have
been driving with alcohol in his breath exceeding the prescribed limit;

f) Make notes of any statements or utterances.

g) Request that the suspected person supply a specimen of breath for testing:

h) Warn the suspected person that under the law a driver must provide a police
officer with a specimen on breath once requested to do so and that failure or
refusal to provide the specimen of breath is an offence which may render
him/her liable to prosecution.

i) Further caution the suspected person that he/she will have three (3)
opportunities to provide the breath specimen for testing failure of which may
render him/her liable to prosecution.

j) Explain and demonstrate to the suspected person how he/she is required to
provide specimen of breath for testing into the instrument as per training.

k) Give the suspected person no more than three (3) opportunities to supply the
specimen of breath for testing.

welT


--- page break ---

80/7
Failure/Refusal of Breath Test
(15) Where a suspected person Fails/Refuses to supply a specimen of breath for the breath test,
the Police Officer making the request for the sample shall-
a) Arrest and caution the suspected person and immediately convey him to the
nearest facilities available for the conducting of breath test or Police Station;
b) At the nearest facility or Police Station for the specimen of breath to be taken are
available or Police Station where a request a specimen of breath for testing shall
again be made and if that request is refused, require the suspected person to
submit to a breath analysis and warn him that a failure to submit may render
him/her liable to prosecution;
c) If the suspected person thereafter refuses to provide a specimen of breath for
analysis, charge the suspected person for the offences of ‘Failing to Supply a
Breath Specimen for Testing’ and ‘Failing to Supply a Breath Specimen for
Analysis;
d) Where a suspected person fails a breath test, whether at the location at which
the offence was detected or at a Police Station, the Police Officer administering the
test shall- |
i) Immediately arrest and caution the suspected person if necessary:
ii) Make notes of any statements or utterances.
iii) Require the suspected person to submit to a breath analysis and warn him that a
failure to submit may render him liable to prosecution.
e) Where a suspected person has been arrested for failing to supply a specimen of
breath for testing, he shall be charged with ‘Failing to Supply a Breath Specimen
for Testing’ notwithstanding that he subsequently provided a specimen of breath
for analysis.
exceed 9


--- page break ---

80/8
Breath Analysis
(16)(A)(a) An authorized officer shall conduct a Breath Analysis-
i) At or near the place where the requirement to submit to the breath analysis
was made, if facilities for the specimens to be taken are available and it is
practicable to conduct the analysis there; or
ii) At a Police Station.

b) Request that the suspected person supply a specimen of breath for analysis:

c) Inform the suspected person that the law requires a driver to provide a police

officer with two specimens of breath for analysis once requested to do so and that

failure or refusal to provide the two specimens of breath is an offence which may
render him/her liable to prosecution.

d) Explain and demonstrate to the suspected person how he/she is required to

provide specimen of breath for testing into the instrument as per training.

e) Give the suspected person no more than three (3) opportunities to supply the

specimen of breath for analysis.

f) Where a suspected person having initially failed/refused to supply a specimen of

breath for testing supplies a specimen of breath for analysis, he/she shall be

charged with ‘Failing to Supply a Breath Specimen for Testing’ not withstanding
that he subsequently provided a specimen of breath for analysis.
Time Period Between Two Breath Analysis
16(B) For the purpose of the breath analysis- the authorized officer shall request two
separate specimens of breath from the suspected person;

i) There shall be an interval of not less than two minutes from the time the first
evidential analysis is completed and not more than ten minutes before the
second evidential analysis is completed;

wicsicl


--- page break ---

80/9
ii) The reading from the specimen that indicated the lower concentration of
alcohol in the suspected person’s breath shall be taken to be the result of the breath
analysis and shall be the amount stated for the charge:
iii) three (3) copies of gach evidential analysis result slip (i.e. both the first and
second analysis) will be printed out, with one set (two evidential slips) being for
the Complainant, the Defendant and one for the Authorized Officer.
16(C) An authorized officer shall, within one hour after a person has submitted to a breath
analysis and failed the said analysis, shall deliver to him/her a Statement of Breath
Analysis in writing signed by the authorized officer specifying-
i) the concentration of alcohol determined by the analysis to be present in his/her
breath and expressed in micrograms of alcohol in one hundred milliliters of breath;
and
ii) The date and time of day on which the breath analysis was complete.
NB. - The Statement of Breath Analysis described above is in the form of the Evidential
Analysis Results Print Slip printout from the Evidential Breathalyzer Unit.
Certificate of Analysis
17) In proceedings against the defendant, the authorized officer shall, prepare in triplicate a
Certificate of Analysis in the form specified at Appendix “F”, with one copy to be retained by
the Authorized officer, one copy to be provided to the Complainant and one copy being provided
to the Approved Devices Keeper.
NB. — It is recommended a copy of the Certificate of Analysis also be provided to the defendant
at the time of laying the charge.
Incident Report Forms
(18) It is the responsibility of the SDO/IC of the station where a suspected person has been
arrested and/or charged for any D.U.I offences to ensure the General Occurrence Incident
Report Forms R1, R2A and R9A are filled out for submission to TTPS data entry personnel.
evn AO


--- page break ---

80/10
Custody of Prisoner Property
(19) A Police Officer who arrests a suspected person shall take all reasonable steps appropriate in
the circumstances to ensure that the suspected person’s vehicle and its contents are secured against
theft or destruction.
Removal of Suspected Person’s Vehicle from Scene
(20) (i) Where a private wrecker is to be used to remove the suspected person’s vehicle to the
police station for safe keeping the senior officer on the scene must explain to the suspected person
the process and that the cost to do so shall be borne by him/her.
(ii)The senior officer on the scene will record the following (Appendix G):

e The Name of the Driver whose vehicle is being removed

e The Name on the Insurance Policy, Policy Number and Expiration Date

e The Color, Make, Model and Registration Number of the vehicle being removed

e The Name, Driver’s Permit Number, Vehicle Registration Number and Telephone

Contact Number of the Wrecker Driver
(iii) Provide the aforementioned details to the suspected person on a sheet of paper.
NB: Wherever reasonably practicable, the defendant should be allowed the opportunity to
contact someone to collect his vehicle and property.
PART II - NIL
|
Commissioner of Po
i]
