Police Orders by Dr. Dwayne Gibbs 
Commissioner of Police 
Police Administration Building 
Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets 
Port of Spain 
Tuesday 12th June 2012 
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian 
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press) 
No.87 PART l- NIL 
Establishment of the 21st Century Policing Initiative Implementation Team 
1.0 INTRODUCTlON 
In pursuit of achieving the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service 's 2011 - 2013 strategic vision, the 
Service has embarked upon the implementation of a new policing methodology hereinafter referred to as 
the 21
51 
Century Policing Initiative. This initiative is geared toward realigning some of TTPS' business 
processes and also involves some physical infrastructural changes to support the initiative. 
Based on globally established best practices in implementing projects, it is important that a project 
implementation unit be established to oversee and manage the project implementation. 
2.0 INTENTION 
The intention of this order is to establish the "Project Implementation Team" within the Trinidad and 
Tobago Police Service as the "bona fide" body for implementing the 21st Century Policing initiative 
throughout all nine (9) divisions of the Service and who are accountable to the established authority in 
undertaking the process. 
3.0 RATIONALE 
Effective policing in the 21st Century requires adopting new methods which involves a combination of 
contemporary policing practices and the use of technology to ensure the desired outcome. This initiative 
is geared to use technology as an enabler to improve the overall efficiency and effectiveness of the 
TTPS at operational, strategic and administrative levels . 
. . . . . . . ./2 



87/2 
4.0 METHODOLOGY 
In implementing the initiative within the TTPS the project implementation team shall-
(i) Engage the assistance of the Public Affairs Unit in carrying out public/cottage meetings to 
alert citizens ofthe new method of policing 
(ii) Engage the Crime & Problem Analysis Branch and Information Technology Unit to deliver 
training in computer literacy, use of the Versadex database , portal usage and TTPS email 
imperative 
(iii) Request the head of each division to appoint a middle manager preferably an officer of the 
rank of sergeant to be a liaison officer for their respective division with the liaison Sergeant 
attached to the project organization/team 
(iv) Deliver lectures throughout the TTPS regarding the content of the initiative and the required 
responsibility of each individual in the change process 
(v) Conduct post implementation review of the initiative after implementation in each division as 
a means of identifying gaps 
(vi) Provide ongoing training within divisions to ensure that they fully understand the initiative 
(vii) Perform other activities as directed by the Commissioner ofPolice and his Executive 
5.0 ADMINISTRATION 
"The project implementation team" shall be under the direct supervision of a Senior Superintendent 
of Police who reports to and consults with the Deputy Commissioner of Police Operations. This team 
will be supported by the head of the Human Resource Branch and other relevant department's heads. 
The established strength of the implementation team shall consist as follows: 
Senior Superintendent Sergeant PC Consultant Civilian Clerks Total 
1 1 1 1 2 6 
6.0 LOCATION 
"The project implementation team" will be housed on the 5th Floor of the Police Administration 
Building Comer Edward and Sackville Streets, Port-of-Spain . 
. . . . . . . ./3 



87/3 
7.0 GENERAL 
The Senior Superintendent of "The project implementation team" is empowered to periodically co­
opt other professionals internal to the TTPS on temporary assignments from time to time who can add 
value by bringing requisite skill sets as the implementation expands service wide. This facility however 
must be done in conformance with the established protocols ofthe TTPS 
8.0 DISSOLUTION OF PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION 
After the 21st Century Policing model has been implemented throughout all nine (9) Divisions of the 
Service, the responsibility for monitoring benchmarking becomes the responsibility of the 
Executive. The"project implementation team" will then be dissolved. 
PARTSI&ill - NIL 
~ 
Commissioner of Police 