t Police Orders by
at Commissioner of Police
Police Administration Building
Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
| slp Port of Spain
4 “ h 2018
% - Tuesday 12" June, 2
Wr PRIDE (This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
No.81 Departmental Order PART I —NIL
PART II
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO POLICE SERVICE
Sex Offenders Registry
MANDATE BY LAW
The Trinidad and Tobago Police Service (TTPS) is mandated via Part III] Section 34, A-D of the
Sexual Offences Act Chapter! 1:28 (the Act) to keep and maintain a ‘Sex Offenders Register”. This
register shall contain biographical data and other pertinent information of persons convicted of Sex
Offences, and those ordered by a Court of Competent Jurisdiction to provide notification
information. This register is required to be kept and maintained by the TTPS.
Section 34 A-C of the Act, mandates that persons convicted of Sex Offences and ordered by the
Court to provide Notification Information to the Police Station in their district shall do so within a
specific timeframe. This information is to be recorded in a Register provided for that purpose in
each station. If the offender fails to comply or provides false information, he is liable to a fine, a
custodial sentence or both. This piece of legislation specifically speaks to an offender who has
been ordered by the court to provide information to the police.
wed


--- page break ---

81/2

FULFILMENT OF MANDATE

In its thrust to effectively fulfil its mandate “To protect and serve with P.R.I.D.E.” and accomplish
its strategic objectives, the TTPS has resolved to create a Sex Offenders Registry which comprises
a Station Sex Offenders Register and an E-Register. This will enable the relevant information on
every Sex offender including those ordered to provide notification in Trinidad and Tobago to be
available to every officer in real time.

The Station Sex Offender Register will be kept at every police station in Trinidad and Tobago.
This register will contain the relevant information of every offender who has fulfilled the
requirement to provide notification in that particular station district. The E-Register is the central
repository of all information on Sex Offenders and shall be maintained by the Criminal Records
Office (CRO).

ESTABLISHMENT
eee
In keeping with the Sexual Offences Act 11:28. the prevalence of Sex Offences in the society and
a desire to provide a system to assist in the prevention and investigation of these crimes the TTPS
created a Sex Offenders Registry, hereafter referred to as the T7PS SO Registry. This registry is
made up of two parts:

(1) A Station Sex Offender Register which is to be maintained at police stations Station
Register — In compliance with Part III Section 34 of the Sexual Offences Act 11:28, a
Station register is to be housed in each station district. It will be completed by a police
officer when a sex offender provides notification. The Station Register is accompanied by
a Sex Offenders Register Acknowledgement Receipt Book, hereafter referred to as the
Acknowledgement Receipt Book, from which a receipt shall be written and provided to the
sex offender who provided notification.

(2) E-Register — The E-register electronically stores information of convicted sex offenders
who are (1) subject to notification requirements and (2) who were not ordered by the Court
to provide notification. The latter information is extracted from

A


--- page break ---

81/3
the TTPS internal criminal records database (Versadex). All information in the E-Register
is stored in a central repository managed and maintained by the Criminal Records Office
(CRO) of the TTPS.
Both components of the registry capture data pertaining to persons who are convicted of Sex
Offences.
The operationalization of the TTPS Sex Offenders Registry will help to establish an integrous
database of Notification Information on convicted Sex Offenders.
RATIONALE
The Court before whom a person is convicted of an offence shall, upon passing sentence, or dealing
with the matter in any other manner, specify the period of time during which the convicted person
shall be subject to notification requirements. Sexual Offences Act 11:28, Sec 34A
The legislation dictates that a sex offender is to provide notification to the police in the first
instance when he is ordered to initially by the Court: and on subsequent occasions, if he:
- changes or uses another name;
- changes his address:
- stays at another address for a period in excess of a stipulated period.
The system was developed to capture and electronically store this information so that it will be
readily available to police officers. In so doing, the TTPS will efficiently administer the functions
attributed to it by law.
INTENTION
The intention of this order is to sensitize TTPS officers about the system that has been instituted
to operationalize the Sex Offenders Registry and the procedures to be adhered to when required to
populate and wishing to access the Station Register and the E-Register.
vl4


--- page break ---

81/4
ADMINISTRATION
The Second Division Officer in Charge (SDO i/c) of each station is required to verify the
information placed on the TTPS Sex Offenders Register (Station Register and E-Register) and
facilitates the transmission of this data to CRO.
The Information Technology Unit (IT) and the Criminal Records Office (CRO) of the TTPS have
been mandated to create and maintain an E-Register in keeping with the TTPS’ technological thrust
and its desire to maintain the veracity of the information.
CRO is required to verify the information and populate the Sex Offender E-Registry, which also
contains sex offender data from the TTPS criminal records system (Versadex) making the
information readily accessible to police officers via the TTPS portal.
INTERPRETATION
What is Notification?
Notification is the provision of information by a Sex Offender to the police as specified by law.
Notification can be provided in writing or in person.
(a) The basis for Sex Offender Notification

This is a requirement of the Sexual Offences Act No. 11:28 Section 34A.

The Court before whom a person is convicted of an offence shall, upon passing a sentence,

or dealing with the matter in any other manner, specify the period of time during which the

convicted person shall be subject to notification requirements. Sexual Offences Act 11:28,

Sec 34A

(b) Providing Notification
An offender thus ordered, must provide to the Police Station nearest to his place of residence
or “local police area”, within 14 days.
a) His name or any other names by which he is known;
b) Home address;
wea


--- page break ---

81/5
c) Date of birth; and
d) Other information as may be required.
Further notification is to be provided within fourteen (14) days:
e) Ifhe uses another name or other names than that which he gave to the police;
f) Ifhe changes his home address; or
g) Ifhe had resided or stayed for a period of fourteen (14) days at any address
which has not been provided to the Police.
(c) Classes of persons required to provide notification
According to Sec 34 A (1) of the Sexual Offences Act 11:28 persons required to provide notification
are outlined as follows:
1. A person convicted and sentenced to a term of imprisonment;
2. Where such sentence has been commuted;
or
3. A person convicted of such offence. but not yet sentenced
shall be instructed or directed by the court as to the period of time wherein he is required to provide
notification to the Police.
(d) Failure to comply with Notification requirements
Failure to comply with Notification requirements (i.e. failure to report) occurs
1. Ifthe sex offender without reasonable excuse fails to comply with these requirements in a
given timeframe (14 days);
or
2. Ifthe sex offender supplies information which he knows to be false.
He is liable on summary conviction, to a fine of $5,000.00 or to imprisonment for one (1) year or
both. (Section 34D)
i /6


--- page break ---

81/6

(e) Reasonable excuses for failure to notify
For the purpose of determining any period for the purposes of this subsection, there shall be
disregarded any time when the person in question IS:

(a) Remanded in or committed to custody by an order of a Court:

(b) Serving a sentence of imprisonment;

(c) Detained in a hospital; or

(d) Outside Trinidad and Tobago.
CONFIDENTIALITY
All the information recorded in the Sex Offender Registry inclusive of the Station Sex Offenders
Register and E-Register is strictly confidential.
Discipline
Section 150 (2) (f) of the Police Service Regulations 2007 outlines the different types of conduct
engaged by police officers which would amount to the disciplinary offence of ‘Breach of
Confidence’, it states, if an officer—

(i) divulges any matter which it is his duty to keep secret;

(ii) gives notice, directly or indirectly, to a person against whom a warrant or summons has
heen or is about to be issued, except in the lawful execution of such warrant or service of
such summons;

(iii)Without proper authority communicates by any means to the public, press, or to any
unauthorised person, any matter connected with the Service;

(iv) Without proper authority shows to any person outside the Service any book or written or
printed document which is the property of the Service;

woul


--- page break ---

81/7
METHODOLOGY
The ‘Notification Order’ by the Court should also be done in triplicate; with one copy given to the
offender, the second copy given to the prosecutor and the third copy retained by the court
When the Court makes a Notification order, in keeping with the Sexual Offences Act 11:28
Sec.34A, the court is required to be clear and unambiguous in outlining the requirements for the
offender.
The Prosecutor/State Attorney who has conduct of the matter is required to record the details of
the order on the CASE RESULTS SHEET, which is attached to the case file.
The case results sheet and copy of the order given to the prosecutor must then be handed over to
the CRO, where an assigned officer inputs the data into the E-Register thereby creating the offender
profile on the Register.
The Information Technology Unit (TTPS) makes the data accessible to all officers of the
organisation via the Portal. Access levels vary in accordance to the responsibilities assigned.
AUTHORITY
Freedom of Information
Entries within the Sex Offenders Registers are exempt Law Enforcement Documents and therefore
are not to be disclosed without a court order being in effect.
Proceedings to be instituted
The Assistant Commissioner ‘Crime’ shall cause proceedings to be instituted, for the offence
committed when the offender fails to provide notification in the first instance; and in all other
instances, proceedings shall be instituted by any police officer who detects the offence in any place
where the person to be charged with the offence resides or is found.

./8


--- page break ---

81/8
Warrant
Proceedings for offences in this part can be instituted via Arrest without warrant in circumstances
where such action is necessary and in other instances, charges can be instituted by Warrants.
PURPOSE
The purpose of the Registry is to capture, store and make accessible to authorised users, the data of
Sex Offenders stored within.

Vv It will support the organisation in managing the “notification requirement” of the Court
Orders in a holistic manner with oversight responsibility residing with the CRO.

v It will enable the investigator of a sex crime to search the database of sex offenders thereby
increasing the opportunity to ‘narrow the suspect pool’ and examine “modus operandi”; this
will increase the detection rate of the sex offences by the TTPS.

Y It will enable the TTPS to identify and monitor Sex Offenders in each community.

¥ It will assist with tracking of Offenders at their current and previous addresses.

Y It will assist officers to better advice residents on crime prevention strategies in their district.

VY It will assist supervisors in deploying their resources more effectively.

¥ All information on Sex Offenders will be housed in a central repository for ease of access.

GUIDELINES FOR THE SEX OFFENDERS REGISTRY
1. Access
- The TTPS SO Registry is accessible to all police officers within the TTPS
- To ensure security and data integrity of the information on the E-Register, only a
specified group of users shall be authorised to input and edit information on the E-
Register i.e. SDO i/c station, SDO i/c CID and persons designated by them
soe D


--- page break ---

81/9

2. Authorised Users
This Registry is to be used by police officers and or civilian employees, in their official
capacity, and who are authorized to do so.

3. Officer Guidelines
The users must properly maintain the SO Registry by ensuring accurate and timely entry of
Sex Offenders’ information into the Station Register and E-Register.
They must investigate and verify the information provided before the information is placed
in both registers.

If Notification is provided in Writing

a) Ifthe offender seeks to provide notification information by “sending a written notification
to the station”, the S.D.O. i/e receiving such information is mandated to ensure that
investigations are conducted to verify the name, address and other related information
provided by the sex offender, as required.

b) This information must be entered into the Sex Offender Station Register and sent to CRO
and to be placed in the Sex Offender E-Register (Appendix 1) within (48) hours of
verification.

c) A receipt must be issued to the sex offender upon verification of the information or upon
completion of the notification process. The receipt must either

a) be delivered to the offender by the police
or

b) collected from the police by the offender

c)

If Notification is provided in Person

d) If an alleged offender (pre or post sentence) goes to the police station in the area that he
resides and reports as ordered by the court, the Sentry or person on duty at the reception
desk, upon being informed of the reason for his presence, must inform the SDO i/c station

veel LD


--- page break ---

81/10

e) The SDO i/e station can cause the appropriate person to interview the offender and extract
the information to populate the E-Register and the Station Register, this must be done
simultaneously or, one, as soon as practicable, after the other.

f) The interviewing officer shall verify the identity of the offender using a photograph
uploaded from the exit interview at the prison or the officer shall request that the alleged
offender provide a fingerprint or photograph to assist in confirming his/her identity.

g) The officer shall conduct an investigation to verify the information provided by the offender
(the verification process may take more than a day or cause the offender to make more than
one visit to the police station.)

h) The Station Commander (not under the rank of Sergeant) shall verify the information in the
Station Register (Appendix 2), and confirm the information to be sent to CRO and to be
placed in the Sex Offender E-Registry (Appendix 1), within twenty-four (24) hours of
verification.

i) In accordance with Standing Order 52 (6), the Station Sex Offender Register is to be kept
and maintained in the same fashion as other Registers in the custody of the police

j) The offender is to be provided with an Acknowledgement/Receipt Form (Appendix 3) on
completion of the notification process.

k) Ifthe offender cannot satisfy all the requirements at the material time. he is to be chronicled
in the Station Diary and be instructed to return as soon as possible to complete the process
and be provided with the Acknowledgement Receipt.

soll]


--- page break ---

81/11
4. The responsibility of the Sex Offender
The Sex Offender must report and provide the notification information that is required within
the specified timeframe. When reporting the following must be adhered to:
1. He should have in his possession a copy of the order of notification which includes:
1. The court which made the order (Magistrate/Judge’s name, jurisdiction, etc.)
2. The period of time given to report.
2. He must have in his possession
- Some form of picture identification; and
- His Birth Certificate.
3. A proper address including house number/lamp pole number or other identifying marks.
4. Proof of address. (Where possible, a utility bill or mail addressed to the offender or a
member of the household in possession of a picture ID, who is present with the offender, or
a letter from the member of the household in whose name the utility bill is made out).
5. He may be required to provide his fingerprints to verify his identity.
5. The Role of the Criminal Records Office (CRO)
1. CRO is required to
- populate the Sex Offender E-Register, via the TTPS Portal, with the information
supplied on the Case Results Sheet, Notification Order and/or Prison Records;
- maintain and manage the E-Register.
2. Verify offender information received from each station district.
3. Confirm the verified information on the E-Register.
4, Flag offenders who fail to provide notification information as ordered;
5. Send notice of flagged offenders to ACP Anti-crime for direction regarding the action to be
taken.
weed 12


--- page break ---

81/12
DEFINITIONS
“Arrestable offence” — has the meaning assigned to it by section 3(1) of the Criminal Law Act.
“Authorised Person” — a person vested with authority, either written or verbal in accordance with
the laws and orders governing the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service.
“Commuted Sentence” — reduced to one less severe.
“Consecutive” — the term of imprisonment shall commence on the expiration of any other term of
imprisonment imposed by that Court or any other Court.
“Constable” — any member of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and member of the Special
Reserve, and includes any member of a Municipal Police Service within the meaning of Part III of
the Municipal Corporations Act.
“Convicted” — been found guilty of an offence after a trial or pleading guilty.
“Court” — any Court of Trinidad and Tobago of competent jurisdiction.
“High Court” — the High Court of Justice of Trinidad and Tobago.
“Home address” — in relation to any person, means the address of his home, that is to say, his sole
or main residence in Trinidad and Tobago, or where he has no such residence, premises in Trinidad
and Tobago which he regularly visits:
“Local police area”, in relation to any person, means the police area in which his home is situated.
“Magistrate” — a person appointed as such by the Judicial and Legal Service Commission and
includes a person appointed under section 3 of the Summary Courts Act.

set


--- page break ---

81/13
“Offence” — any act for the commission of which a person is by law liable to a penalty.
“Offender” — a person who commits any act for which a person is by law liable to a penalty;
“Registry” may be defined as a place where registers are kept.
“Sentenced” — the judgement of a court in a criminal case.
“Sex Offender E-Register” — an electronic register which accessible via the TTPS Portal by
authorized persons; and to maintained and updated by the Criminal Records Office. It contains
information on two categories of sex offenders:

(1) convicted Sex Offenders who were not ordered by the Court to provide notification

(This information is extracted from our internal criminal records database)

(2) convicted Sex Offenders who were ordered by the Court to provide notification.
“Station Register” - a manual register which is to be housed at every police station in which is
recorded information provided by a sex offender who was ordered by the court to so do.
STATUTORY REFERENCES
sexual Offences Act 11:28 ...0.0...000000 sc.see0..Part ILL Section 34. A-C
Summary Courts Act ..........eeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeee SECtion 104
Freedom of Information Act Chap 22:02.............Section 28(d &e)

Police Service Regulations 2007.................... Section 150 (2) (f)
TTPS Standing Orders..............cceseeeeeeeeeeee NO 52
./14


--- page break ---

81/14
TTPS SEX OFFENDER E-REGISTER
| / |
— ] f |
/ | |
| ff | | |
| rs |
|


--- page break ---

81/15
KEY NOTES FOR WORK FLOW PROCESS
A

Offender Notification via writing to the station:

When the offender provides notification by sending it in writing to the station:-

** The offender should address the correspondence to the SDO i/c of the station and provide
contact information. If the correspondence is not addressed, the officer accepting should
forward same to the SDO i/c station/

“* The SDO i/c shall detail an officer to conduct proper enquiries to verify the notification
information provided.

¢* If any of the information provided proves to be false the officer conducting enquires shall
arrest and charge the offender for whatever offence is identified.

“* If the information provided proves to be incomplete, the investigator informs the offender
and provides a deadline for the offender to complete the process.

“* When all notification information is provided, the Station Register and the E-Register must
be updated.

“+ On completion, an Acknowledgement Receipt is issued to the offender by (i) the police
delivering it to the offender or (ii) the offender being contacted by the police and asked to
collect it at the station.

.../16


--- page break ---

81/16
B
Offender Notification is reported in person.
When the offender provides notification in person:-

“+ The sentry informs the SDO i/c station. The SDO i/c station can then interview or can cause
an officer to interview the offender. verify the information received as well as to populate
the Station Register and E-Register under the supervision of the SDO i/c station.

“* Ifthe offender reports within the timeframe but the information given by the offender is
incomplete, the offender will then be chronicled in the Station Diary and given a deadline
to return with information.

¢* It is important that the SDO i/c informs CRO when the offender begins the verification
process, if this is not done and the deadline passes the offender is then flagged, triggering
an investigation

*+ When the offender returns. the officer (who is detailed by the SDO i/c station) inputs their
information into the Station Register and E-Register

“** Acknowledgement receipt is issued to offender thereafter

“* Offender information is verified by SDO i/c station and forwarded to CRO.

¢* Ifthe information provided is discovered to be false or any other offence is unearthed during
the process, the offender is charged.

th
Information sent to CRO via the Case Results sheet or Notification Order:-

“* CRO populates the E-Register with biographical data of the offender and other information
relating to notification requirements to be fulfilled.

** Offender reports to station and provide information as per (B6).

** CRO confirms information input by station and “greenlights” offender.

*» Ifthe offender fails to report as ordered, the E-Register system flags the offender and an e-

mail with this information will be automatically generated and sent to the ASP CID/CRO.


--- page break ---

D
ASP CID/CRO notifies ACP Crime that offender failed to report as per court order

¢* On receipt of the information concerning the flagged offender, the ACP Crime directs the
relevant entity (CID or Division) to conduct enquiries and report findings within 7 days.

«* ACP Crime then issues a directive about the action which should be taken concerning the
flagged offender.

“+ If the investigation reveals wrongdoing and the offender is not charged immediately, a
warrant is issued for the offender, the Court and Process Warrant officer obtains and
executes warrant.

“* Offender Charged.
PART I — NIL
Age
