No. 92 
Police Orders by Dr. D. Gibbs 
Commissioner of Police 
Police Administration Building 
Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets 
Port of Spain 
Wednesday 18th May 2011 
lis is an official document entrusted to members and civilian 
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press) 
Departmental Order PART I-NIL 
PART II 
Trinidad and Tobago Police 
Service 
Use of Force Policy 
Page 11 



Use of Force Policy 
1.0 Introduction 
Police officers of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service have the invested authority through the 
Police Service Act 2006, the Standing Orders and the Constitution ofTrinidad and Tobago in the 
Use of Force. The provisions outlined in this Policy are intended to supplement these existing 
legislations and guide officers to react appropriately when confronted with a situation which 
requires some degree of force. It is the policy of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service that law 
enforcement officers will use only that force which is reasonable and necessary, and at all times 
seek to protect the safety and security of himself7herself and others in the performance of official 
duties. 
Sound judgment and the appropriate exercise of discretion will always be the foundation of 
police officers' decision in varying situations regarding the possible Use of Force. Deciding 
whether to utilize force in the performance of official duties is among the most critical decisions 
made by law enforcement officers. It is a decision which is made under difficult, often 
unpredictable and unique circumstances. It is not the intention of this policy to entirely replace 
judgment and discretion with detailed policy provisions. 
The Trinidad and Tobago Police Service recognizes that the duties of Police Officers may 
involve the use of some level of force and this policy supports the lawful use of reasonable and 
appropriate force by officers in the performance of their duty. The use of force that is not lawful, 
reasonable and appropriate, is not supported by this policy and will not be tolerated. 
2.0 Definitions 
a. Approved Weapon: a device or instntment, the primary function of which is intended to 
be the application of force to a person, and which an officer has received permission 
from the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service to carry and use in the discharge of that 
officer's duties, and for which the officer has 
i. obtained training in the technical, mechanical and physical aspects of the device 
or instrument; and 
ii. developed a knowledge and understanding of the law, roles and regulations 
regarding the use of the particular device or instrument. 
b. Chemical Agents: chemical i"itants or combinations of chemical irritants. 
Page 12 



c. Deadly Force: All force applied by an officer that the officer knows, or reasonably 
should know, creates a substantial risk of causing death or grievous bodily harm to a 
person. 
d. Firearm: means a firearm as defined in the Firearms Act of Trinidad and Tobago. 
e. Grievous Bodily Harm: Bodily injury which creates a high probability of death, or which 
causes serious, permanent disfigurement, or which causes a permanent or protracted loss 
or impairment of any bodily organ or other serious bodily harm. 
f Impact Weapons: objects and instnunents that are used, or designed to be used, to apply 
force to the person of another by coming into physical contact with that person. 
g. Intermediate Weapon: means any weapon authorized for use by a member of the 
Trinidad and Tobago Police Service, other than; 
i. a firearm used as described, authorized or referred to under this policy, or 
ii. a weapon that when used in its ordinary and intended manner is as likely to cause 
grievous bodily harm or death to a person as a firearm referred to in paragraph 
(i) above 
and includes a firearm used with ammunition designed to be discharged with a projectile 
that is not designed or intended to cause grievous bodily harm or death to a person. 
h. Non-Deadly Force: All force applied by an officer that is not intended to cause, nor 
create a substantial risk of causing death or grievous bodily harm to a person. 
i. Reasonable Belief: An objective assessment based upon an evaluation of how a 
reasonable law enforcement officer with comparable training and experience would react 
to, or draw inferences from, the facts and circumstances confronting and known by the 
law enforcement officer at the scene. 
j. Weapon: anything that is used, intended to be used, or designed to be used, to apply 
force to the person of another. 
Page 13 



3.0 Use of Force Policy 
1. Use of Force 
a. A police officer in determining to use force, shall be guided by the principle that the 
degree of force employed in any situation should be reasonably necessary to : 
1. Protect the officer, or other person or persons, from unlawful force 
n. Overcome resistance directed at the officer or others 
m. Effect other lawful objectives, such as to make an arrest 
1v. Protect property 
b. To assist the police officerin deciding the level of force appropriate in various 
circumstances, the following guidelines are established: 
1. Officers shall not resort to the use of force unless such use is necessary in the 
execution of their duties and cannot reasonably be accomplished by non­
violent means, 
n. The decision as to whether force is to be used, and the amount to be applied, 
shall rest solely with the officer involved in the incident, 
iii. A reasonable assessment of the prevailing circumstances should be made by 
the officer in deciding the level of force to be used 
tv. Officers shall not use any more force than is reasonably necessary under the 
circumstances to accomplish their lawful objectives as cited in 2(a) above. 
v. Officers must exhaust all other reasonable means before resorting to the use of 
force. 
Page 14 



The following Use ofForce framework provides a guide to assist officers in assessing the 
situation to determine the level of force to be applied. 
Stage 1 
Use of Force Framework 
Officer considers all available information and develops 
a preliminary assessment of the situation 
Stage 2 Officer immediately processes the information based on his 
knowledge, experience and training and weighs his options. 
Stage 3 
Stage 4 
Officer considers and selects best course of action avaiJable 
based on his assessment of the situation. 
Officer acts in response to the level of threat encountered. The action will be dictated 
by the officer's assessment of the sitnation but may be halted, revised, delayed or 
replaced with an allemate course of action as detennined by the officer as a result of a 
change in the circumstances being encountered. 
Page 15 



The Use of Force Options Model indicates the degree of force that can be applied by police 
officers in the execution of their duties. 
Less Force 
More Force 
Presence 
Communication 
Escort technique 
Mechanical Control-
Degree of Force 
Police Presence 
Communication 
Escort techniques 
Mechanical control 
Chemical Irritants 
Impact weapon 
Deadly Force 
Maintaining a passive , on site presence. 
Talking a subject into compliance~ avoids danger of a 
physical confrontation . 
If dialogue fails, use low level compliance procedure. Non­
obtrusive, non- violent in nature . 
Using physical force to subdue a subject and may include applying 
physical restraints . 
Page 16 



Chemical Irritants Use of substances such as pepper spray or tear gas to gain control 
of a subject 
Impact weapon Includes the use of a weapon such as a baton or projectile. 
Deadly force- Force used for the purpose of causing or which has the substantial 
risk of causing death or grievous bodily harm. 
The TTPS Use of Force Options Model is included in this policy at Appendix 'A'. 
n. Use of Deadly Force 
a. An officer may resort to the use of deadly force when the officer reasonably believes 
such action is immediately necessary to protect himself or others from imminent 
danger of death or grievous bodily harm. 
b. An officer may use deadly force to prevent the escape of a suspect: 
t. whom the officer has probable cause to believe has committed an offence in 
which the suspect caused, or attempted to cause death or grievous bodily harm 
to any person; and 
n. who will pose an imminent danger of death or grievous bodily harm to any 
person, or persons, should the escape succeed; and 
iii. when the use of deadly force presents no substantial risk of injury to innocent 
persons. 
c. Where feasible, an officer should identify himself/herself and state his/her intention to 
shoot before using a firearm. 
iii. Restrictions on tbe Use of Force 
a. An officer is under no obligation to retreat or desist when resistance is encountered or 
threatened, unless circumstances exist which would make retreating an appropriate 
action. 
b. An officer shall not resort to the use of deadly force unless the officer reasonably 
believes that a less lethal use of force would not avert the imminent danger of death 
or serious bodily harm to any person or persons. 
Page 17 



c. An officer shall not use deadly force to subdue persons whose actions are only 
destructive to property. 
d. Deadly force shall not be used against persons whose conduct is injurious only to 
themselves. 
e. An officer shall not discharge a weapon as a signal for help or as a warning shot. 
f An officer shall not fire from a moving vehicle, or at the driver or occupant of a 
moving vehicle unless the officer reasonably believes: 
1. there exists an imminent danger of death or serious bodily harm to the officer 
or another person; and 
11. no other means are available at that time to avert or eliminate the danger. 
g. An officer shall not fire a weapon solely to disable moving vehicles. 
4.0 Exhibiting bolstered firearms 
Unnecessarily or prematurely drawing a firearm limits an officer's alternatives in controlling 
a situation, creates unnecessary anxiety on the part of citizens, and may result in an 
unwarranted or accidental discharge of the firearm. A officer's decision to exhibit a firearm 
should be based on the tactical situation and the officer's reasonable belief that there is 
substantial risk and the situation may escalate to the point where deadly force may be 
justified. 
When an officer has determined that the circumstances create a reasonable belief that the use 
of deadly force is not necessary, the officer should, as soon as practicable, secure or holster 
the firearm. 
5.0 Psychological care 
All Use of Force incidents affect each officer differently and may result in varied levels of 
stress and manifestations of symptoms of post-trauma stress disorder (PTSD). Within 24 
hours of a Use of Force incident involving the use of deadly force, the supervisor of the 
affected officer/s must: 
1. Engage the involved officers in a mandatory debriefing guided by TTPS social 
workers. 
u. Arrange for counseling for the officers from the police social workers or psychologist 
for assistance in dealing with any after-effects of the incident. 
If necessary, this courtesy should also be extended to family members ofthe affected officer. 
Page 18 



In instances where deadJy force was not used but where based on the circumstances of the 
incident it is determined that psychological care may be warranted, the supervisor of the 
affected officer/s must activate the above procedure. 
6.0 Medical aid after use of force 
Where there is an injury or an alleged injury as a result of the Use of Force the officer(s) 
shall immediately: 
t. make arrangements to convey the injured to obtain medical attention; 
11. secure the crime scene; 
111. notify his/her supervisor; and 
1v. where death occurs, the District Medical Officer shall be notified and summoned 
to the scene. 
7.0 Injury exacerbated by the Use ofForce 
Certain restraint positions increase the risk of death to persons who may be under the 
influence of drugs or who may be in a mentally altered state. Prolonged struggles and 
elevated levels of force applied can accelerate the life-threatening aspects of this condition. 
In these circumstances where individuals exhibit medical conditions of extreme violent 
behaviors the officer shall: 
1. Delay attempts to restrain these individuals until sufficient assistance is on hand; and 
11. Immediately after restraint, these individuals should be seated upright to relieve 
breathing, and transported to a medical facility. 
Page 19 



8.0 Reporting requirements 
In all instances when chemical irritants, impact weapons or deadly force is applied , each officer 
who has initiated such action must complete the attached Use ofForce Report (Appendix 1) in 
triplicate and submit it to his/her supervisor within twenty-four hours of the occurrence or as 
soon as practicable. 
In the case of incidents involving police shootings the protocol outlined in Departmental Order 
No. 176 of2008 is to be adopted in reporting the incident. 
9.0 Training requirements 
The Trinidad and Tobago Police Service will conduct training for all police officers on the 
lawful and appropriate Use of Force. This training wilJ be designed and delivered in accordance 
with the guidelines outlined in this policy and all existing legislation. 
A periodic retraining program will be implemented to ensure that officers are aware of this 
policy and remain current in the applicable use of force techniques and tools. 
10.0 Sanctions 
Officers of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service are guided by the Police Service Regulations 
and the Standing Orders in the performance of their duties, and in the event of a breach, 
disciplinary proceedings would be initiated. In the same context, this policy supplements both 
the Police Service Regulations and the Standing orders and any officer who is proven to deviate 
from the guidelines outlined in this policy shall be in breach of this policy and held accountable 
and/or criminally liable for their actions. 
Within twenty-four (24) hours of any reported incident of use of force, the Divisional 
Commander shall appoint an investigating officer of the rank of Assistant Superintendent or 
above and consistent with the provisions of Departmental Order No. 176 of 2008. The 
investigating officer shall submit a report no later than seven (7) days after being appointed. 
On receipt of the report of the investigating officer, if the report reveals that excessive force was 
used, the Divisional Commander shall cause disciplinary proceedings to be initiated on the 
officer accused of using excessive force. These disciplinary proceedings, however, will be 
without prejudice to any criminal charges that may be initiated against the officer before the 
Courts. 
Page 110 



Appendix A 
TTPS Use of Force Operational Model 
COOPERATIVE 
ACTIVE 
RESISTANT 
This Force Options Model is to be used for the training of all TIPS members and directly relates 
to the TIPS Use of Force Policy. 
Page Ill 



References 
Burlington Police Department: Use of Force Report Form - Officer Report 
Criminology Research Centre, Canada: Use of Force Policy 
Denver Police Department: Use of Force Policy 
Edmonton Police Service: Use of Force Policy 
Guard and Emergency Branch? Trinidad and Tobago Police Service: Situational Use of Force 
Options 
Laws of Trinidad and Tobago: Police Service Act, 2006 
London Metropolitan Police: Use of Force Policy 
Minnesota: Use of Force Policy 
New Jersey Attorney General Office: Use of Force Police, June 2000 
Special Anti Crime Unit of Trinidad and Tobago: Rules of Engagement 
State of Louisiana : In Service Manual 
Toronto Police Service: Use of Force Policy 
Trinidad and Tobago Police Service: Use of Force Policy 2003 
Trinidad and Tobago Police Service : Standing Orders 
United States Department of Justice : Use of Force - Overview of National and Local Data 
United Nations: Manual of Guidance on Police Use of Firearms 
Trinidad and Tobago Police Service: Departmental Order No. 176 of2008 
PARTID-NIL 
(~ 
'--­Commissioner ofPolice 
Page 112 