Police Orders by
ty) Commissioner of Police
: : Police Administration Building
TaA\¥n Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
LEME Port of Spain
(Speen Tuesday 10" July, 2018
2 pRoreer ann so oe , 1 oege
WITH PRIDE (This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
SS SS
No. 91 Departmental Order PART I & III -NIL
PART Il
2018 Police Promotion Examination to the rank of Inspector

The Police Service Examination Board has advised that the 2018 Police Promotion Examination to the

Rank of Inspector will be held at the Police Academy, St. James on Wednesday 7 November, 2018.

Applications are invited from officers who have been promoted to the rank of Police Sergeant and also

includes those who were previously unsuccessful.

The Board has decided that candidates should be informed of the following guidelines:

(i) There are two (2) components of the examination and candidates are required to do both components
the pass mark for each component is fifty (50) marks.

(ii) | The deadline date for submission of representation/requests for reviews or remarks would be
thirty (30) consecutive days from the date the results are released to you by the Police Service
Examination Board.

(iii) Representations/requests for review or re-mark must be made in writing and brought in or
sent directly to the Senior Superintendent, Human Resource Branch, Police Administration
Building, Corner Edward and Sackville Streets, Port of Spain. Representations received after the
deadline date will not be entertained.

(iv) | Request for re-mark will only be entertained for candidates scoring a minimum of 35% of the
total marks in the particular component.

(v) There is no cost for review/re-mark of an examination script.

Officers are required to fill out the prescribed application form (see appendix A) and submit directly to the

Senior Superintendent, Human Resource Branch, Police Administration Building, Corner Edward &

Sackville Streets, Port of Spain NO LATER THAN FRIDAY 07" SEPTEMBER, 2018.

Late applications will not be cknowledged.
= Ly
: Commissioner of Police


--- page break ---

<=?) s . . .
RON Police Promotion Examination 2018
Application form for Special Police Promotional Examination in the
Second Division to the rank of
(INSPECTOR)
(in accordance with Section 16(1) of the Police Service Regulations 2007)
1. No: Rank: Sergeant
Surname: First Name:
Division/Branch attached to
Contact Nos.
2. Year promoted to Sergeant:
Indicate year and Departmental Order number
a, Component to be written in 2018:
BUSINESS COMMUNICATION COMPONENT:
e WRITING COMPETENT REPORTS
e STRUCTURE OF GOOD LETTER WRITING
e EFFECTIVE MEMO WRITING SKILLS
4. The Police Promotional Examination to the rank of Inspector will be held at the Police
Training Academy.
Date: Signature of Applicant:
