aS Police Orders by
ey Commissioner of Police
, Police Administration Building
a i Cor. Edward & Sackville Streets
ee J Port of Spain
— Monday 1* July 2013
(This is an official document entrusted to members and civilian
employees of the Police Service and is not for publication in the Press)
No. 97 Departmental Order PART I - NIL
PART Il
CONFERENCE OF HEADS OF GOVERNMENT OF THE CARIBBEAN COMMUNITY
dL: The Republic of Trinidad and Tobago will be hosting the 34'" Regular Meeting of the Conference of
Heads of Government of the Caribbean Community from July 03 — 06", 2013.
2 The Trinidad and Tobago Police Service with assistance from other agencies of the Ministry of
National Security as well as other relevant departments are tasked with the role and responsibility for all
security arrangements for the conference.
3, MISSION
To ensure a safe and secure environment for the conference and to provide security for the delegation and
officials.
4. INTENT
This Order is intended to inform police officers of the onerous responsibility of ensuring that the conference
is conducted in an environment that is safe, secure and free from threats of sabotage, violence, disruption and
terrorism while maintaining law and order.
Ee THREAT ASSESSMENT
The policing operation for the conference is focused on the national, regional and international threat level
towards potential targets in order to reduce vulnerability. Close liaison will be maintained with other
agencies in order that assessments or relevant intelligence are forwarded immediately to the Gold or Silver
Commanders for action.
mae 92


--- page break ---

97/2
6. METHOD
The Gold, Silver and Bronze Command Structure will be used to ensure clarity and chain of command at the
Strategic, Tactical and Operational Levels.
Ag. Deputy Commissioner of Police Earl Gonzales is the Gold Commander with his alternate Ag. Assistant
Commissioner of Police, Stephen Ramsubhag. .
The Silver Commanders will be responsible for Tactical Command and directing the implementation of the
policing arrangements whilst ensuring that the objectives and plans in accordance with the Operational Order
are fulfilled.
Silver Commanders are:
Ag. Snr. Superintendent Gould - Special Branch
Asst. Supt. Rajkumar - Traffic and Highway Patrol Branch
Ag. Superintendent Daniel - Northern Division
Ag. Snr. Superintendent Garrick - Port-of-Spain Division
Ag. Superintendent Trim . North Eastern Division
Assistant Superintendent Grant - CID and CRO
Ag. Asst. Superintendent Aguillal  - Guard and Emergency Branch
Ag Snr, Superintendent Santana - Southern Division
Members of the Joint Police and Military Teams will conduct Safety and Security Operations in the
following duties:
a) Preserve Order at the Piarco International Airport and environs on the occasions of the arrival and

departure of the dignitaries.
b) Provide close body protection and tactical support for the dignitaries and entourage at the Hilton Trinidad
Hotel and the Diplomatic Centre.

c) Provide escorts to the dignitaries and control traffic throughout the conference.
Silver Commander Special Branch will ensure that full close body protection is provided for the delegates.
He will also arrange to have a continuous threat assessment conducted and the relevant venues swept by the
Explosive Detection Disposal Unit (EDDU) and secured.
Silver Commander Port-of-Spain Division will supervise and be responsible for detailing a sufficient strength
to preserve order at the Hilton Trinidad Hotel, the Diplomatic Centre and environs, also at the Water Taxi
Terminal.
Silver Commander Western Division will supervise and be responsible for detailing a sufficient strength to
preserve order duties at the Chaguaramas Convention Centre and at Pier 1, also to manage Traffic along the
Western Main Road.

... 13


--- page break ---

97/3
Silver Commander Southern Division will supervise and be responsible for detailing a sufficient strength to
preserve order at the Petrotrin Retreat Facility (Petrotrin Staff Club)
Silver Commander Traffic and Highway Patrol Branch will be responsible for providing escort for the
entourage and clearing the roadway of any traffic disruption.
Silver Commander Guard and Emergency Branch will provide Tactical Support to the Special Branch and
conduct public order duties.
Silver Commander CID and CRO will assign a team of investigators to deter and disrupt any criminal acts
also to arrest and prosecute any person involved in criminal activities against the dignitaries and members of
the delegation.
COMMUNICATIONS LOCATION
Operations Coordinating Centre 15"Floor Riverside Plaza
(OCC) Port-of-Spain
1868623-5202
1868708-0234
DRESS
Dress for the visit is as follows:-
(i) F.D.O’s and Inspectors - Patrol dress with cloth belt
(Canes to be carried)
(ii) | Other ranks - Patrol Order No. 1
ASSISTING FORCES
° TTDF (Trinidad and Tobago Defence Force)
e TTFS (Trinidad and Tobago Fire Service)
@ AATT (Airports Authority of Trinidad and Tobago)
= TTCAA (Trinidad and Tobago Civil Aviation Authority)
® CUSTOMS AND EXCISE
© IMMIGRATION
e ODPM (Office of Disaster Preparedness Management)
° SSA (Strategic Services Agency)
° NSOC (National Security Operations Centre)
e TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT
e MINISTRY OF HEALTH
e REGIONAL CORPORATIONS
° PORT AUTHORITY
° T&TEC (Trinidad and Tobago Electricity Commission)
° WASA (Water and Sewerage Authority)
../4


--- page break ---

97/4
MAIN VENUES
Hilton Trinidad and Conference Centre
Diplomatic Centre
Chaguaramas Convention Centre
Petrotrin Retreat Facility, Point-a-Pierre
AUTHORITY
Section 193(1) of the Police Service Regulations 2007
GENERAL
Personnel are reminded that they are to be alert and vigilant and exercise tact and courtesy in the
performance of their duties. They must display the highest degree of efficiency and professionalism in
keeping with the mission statement.
PART Iii - NIL
rae,
v\4 \ 13
