\
\ .\( .. 
' ' \ 
' ,. 
' 
II 
!I 
! 
1 ; 
.. Police Orders by Commissioner of Police 
. t . Police Adri1inistration Building 
Cor. Ech.vard & Sackville Streets 
. ' .. 
•. \ \ .\ y \ \ 
' '\ l'l. 
Port of Spain 
\1onday 26th March 2001 
•!. 
p \ .'i 
(\fhis is an official documenl cntn.1sted m members and civilian 
employees of the Police Service and is not for ptlbiication in the Press) 
' \ ~) 64. Departmental Prder PhKI:1 
rilL. 
\\ t'l 
~ t I\ t• \ 
.ffRr'OF'J·MNCE 
Afr'RAISAL AND 
~A.AM AGEM.ErJT 
:=r'(ST.EM 
.PART li 
1, TI1e undermentioned are tht---; duties and responsibilities for the ranks of 
Superintendent to Constable performing general police duties to facilitate tht~ 
New Perlonnance Appraisal Management System. 
A SUPERINTENDENT OF POUCE (GENERAL) DMSIONAL POSTlNG 
DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITES: 
1. Directs and co-crdmates the day-to-day operations of Police Stations 
wtthin an assigned Divisibn. Tnis mvo1ves: 
i) Ensuring the implementation of policies and adherence of rules, 
regulations and service orders; 
iD Devising work plans I schedules; 
iii) Monitoring and revievving work performed by staff and 
providing technical advice and guidance inf respect of complex 
matters; 
iv) Identifying training needs and recommending and 
implementing suitable training programmes for staff 
development; 
v) Perf01'rr'i1ng personnel functions such as:-
a) ,~ppraising and evaluating staff petiormance; 
b) Recommending staff promotion and transfers; 
c) Approving applications for leave in accordance with 
departmental po1icies and guidelines; 
d) Certifying travelling and other claims; 
e) Initiating disciplinary proceedings, as required. 
2. Makes policy recommendations vJith respect to the operations of the 
assigned Division. 
. ..... .' ..... /2 



64/2 
\ investigates I directs the investigation of complex ctiminai 
·~;atters. major or fatal road traffic accidents and occurrences such 
«~· fire<; and suiddes and submits reports thereon. 
4. Co-ordinates and superv1ses seculi~.J a11·angernents for special 
events <:uch as poiitical and sports meetings, processions and rnarches 
VVirhm assigned Division. 
' Visits Police Stations \A..ithin ass1gned Dlv1sion and inspects 
log books 1 registers 1 other documents, build1ngs equipn1ent and machinery 
to en<>ure confom1ity to departmental regulations, gttidelines and standards. 
b. Lectures to police officers on departments' regulations, policies, 
ln,pllcations of new or amended laws and new techmques of poHce work 
and to schools and community groups on c1irne prevention and related issues. 
7. Assists in the preparation of Draft Estimates of Expenditure for the 
. !!; .. 
ass1gned u.VlSion. 
R Revtews application for licences to operate clubs, bars. restatn-ants, 
stz:_ge public fetes. and makes recommendations for further action. 
- 4 • 
q Functions as a Tribunal Officer for discipnnary matters of poijce 
officers as delegated by the Pollee SelVice Comm1ssion. 
·!G ~eiVes as Prosecutor in the Magistrate's Court in selected cases. 
11. Represents the Police Service al meettngs, semin~rs and workshops. 
12. l'erionns general police duties such as traffic and crowd controi1 
.:l!l·estmg and laying charges against violators of law, executing warrants, 
"eJving '>ummonses and attending court as complainant or ~vvltness as required. 
13. Direct I conducts searches of vehicies, premises and suspidous persons. 
14. Direct and co-ordinates large-scale police exercises. 
E. To deve1op Community Policing policies and procedures, consistent 
~:v1th the Conm1unity Policing th!Ust, enswing that the goals and objectives 
directly re1atecl to this thmst are included and eventually accomplished. 
16. To plan, direct and co-ordinate all activities related to the Community 
Policmg thn1st in conjunction with commtmity leaders. 
17 To create an environment that wm motivate Police Officers and 
:.:ornmunity members to develop and foster nev .. ', professionai re1ationships 
airned at solidifying the partnership between the community and the Police. 
! 8. :-~) effectively obtain, manage and distribute available resources, 
en:-.unng that the needs directly r;~lated to the Community Po!1cmg · 
philosophy are met 
i C:. To develop policies and procedtlres to ensure that the goais and objectives 
;Jf the Community Policing initiatives are iulfilled. 



64/3 
20. Perfcmns other duties related to job function which may be assig11ed 
from time to bme. 
B ASSISTANT SUPERINTENDENT OF POLICE (GENERAL) 
DlVJSIONAI. POSTING 
DUTIESt\ND RESPONSlBIL[WS: -
1. As.s1sts in managmg the day-to-day operations of an assigned area 
Within a DiviSIOn This involves: 
ll 
1· •. , v; 
Directing the in1p!en~entation of po1icies, procedures and 
adherence to rules) re~m1hons and se1vice orders; 
""' 
implementing work plans; 
Monitoring and revievVing work perfonned by staff and 
providing technical advice and gu]dance; 
Performing personnel functions such as·-
a} Identifying of directing the identification of staff training 
needs. 
b} Recommending ar:d implementing or directing the 
implementation of staff development training 
programmes. 
C) Appialslng and evaluating staff performance. 
d) Recommending staff promotion and transfers. 
ej Initiating disciphnaty action as required. 
2. !\'lakes recommendations v...ith respect to the operational procedUies 
within assigned area. 
3. investigates I directs the investigation of complex criminal matters. 
major /fatal road traffic accidents and occurrences such as fires and suicides and 
submits reports to supervisor. 
4. Co-ortiinates and supetvises secmity arrangements for special events 
such as political and sports meeting processions and marches. 
o. Visits police stations \Nithin assigned St.tb-Division and inspects iog 
books I registers I oth!;!r o.~."'}~~tAments, buildings, equfpment and machinery to 
ensure c:onfonnity to departmental regJlatlons, gu1delines and standanis. 
6. Lectures to police officers on departments' regulations, policies, 
implications of new or amended laws and new technjques of police work and 
to schools and community groups on crime prevention and related issues. 
7. Assists in the preparathJn of Draft Estimates of Expenditure for the 
Branch I Division by reviewing and compiling data on expenditure for Police 
Stations with the Sub-Division . 



64/4 
J;, Reviews new applications or renewais of licences to operate dubs, 
Ddr, restaurants, stage public fetes. and for pem1its to cany firearms and 
m.i~ t~~ ;,ppropriate recon1mendations to supervisor. 
·,; ;{epresents the Police Service at meetingS; serninars and workshops, 
)Srtirected. 
1 t.1 Cnnducts audits of police stations and monthly inspections of 
vehicles within an ass·igned Division. 
·1 'l. Conducts idemification parades. 
12. Directs 1 conducts searches of vehicles, premises and suspicious persons 
in accordance \"'ith the relevant laws. 
13. Perrom1s admmistrative functions as ex-officio justice of the Peace. 
14. Pe1ionns general police duties from time to time such as traffic 
and crowd conhnl, atTesting and laying charges against violators of the 
lt:!w. executing wan·ants and serving summonses and attending collrl as 
c~omplainant or \.vitness. 
1 ). Assist the Superintendent in conveying the Community Polidng 
ph:losophy by operationalising this concept through the implementation of 
pl )iide~ directly related to the Community Policing thrust. 
16. .1\SSiSt the Superintendent by ensuring thclt these poiicies are 
rr~~:nlt::!red and evaiuated and maktng recommendatKms where necessaty, 
; m··, r1rd-, the gro\vth and development of the commut11ty Policing phHosophy. 
17. Enstm~ that Domestic Violence matters and occun·ences are properly 
::\vestJgated and reports With recommendations are subm1tted in a timely 
fTi,-lJlPt.!l' 
lS Co-ordinating Seminars/ Programmes and lectures on Community 
PG!:G; 1g Philosophy to Schools and Organisations, induding other related 
topics .such as Drug Abuse, Incest, Child Abuse and Domestic Violence. 
; 9. To direct, supervise and conduct lecture I workshop for the benefit of 
personnel under his command. 
2Q To conduct case conferences with Juven1les and other offenders to 
resolve cont1icts when necessary and to medjate in matters which do not 
necessitate court action. 
2 j fe1iorrns other duties related to job function which may be assigned 
frrnTi time to time. 
.. ................ /5 



I . 
64/5 
C. POUCE INSPECTOR (GENERAl.) DIVISIONAL POSTING 
DUTIES & RESPONSIBILITIES 
1. Directs and supervises the actiVities of one or more Police Stations jn 
an assigned Division This involves: 
i) devising work schedules and assigning duties; 
ii) monitoringi reviewing work peliorn1ed by junior staff; 
HI) appraising and evaluating the petiormance of staff; 
iv) proVJding guidance and recommending the appropriate training 
for staff; 
vl imtiating disciplinary action; 
vi) appmVing applications for ieave. 
2. Vis1ts Police Stations, on a daily basis. to ensure that operations are ln 
conformity with established departmental policies and procedures. 
3. inspects public establishments such as bars and dnemas to ensure that 
operations are in accordance vvith the relevant laws. 
4. Lectures to junior officers on regulations and policies, implications of 
new or amended laws and new tec~niques of police work; and to school and 
other community groups on specific aspects, functions and objectives of police 
departments. 
5 Inspects police log books, registers and other documents, and equipment 
and machine1y assigned to the Station 1 Unit to ensure confonnity to 
departmental regulations, guidelines and standards. 
6. Prepares ass1g11ed cases for Court by compiling/reviewing an 
documents which are recorded for prosecution and submitting to relevant 
authOiities 
7. Attends court to testify m/prosecute traffic violation and criminal 
cases. 
8. W1ites periodic reports on the operations of assigned Police Statlons, 
Branchfl :nit, makes recommendations for improvements/changes and 
submits to Supervisor. 
9. Reviews and certifies correspondences, reports and other documents 
prepared by junior staff. 
10. Supervises the conduct of investigations, patrols, road-blocks, raids and 
identification parades. 
11. Required to perfonn the following po!1ce duties from time to time: 
crowd control, escort duties, traffic duties, maintaining law and order at 
collrt, poJitjcai meetings and public functions. 



64/6 
'~, Direct and s·upervise Community Pohcing operations in 
-:.:c;:aboration v .. ~th other Stations \Vithin a Divisior:. 
·! ~ Co-ordinating. designing and develop!ng p:-ograrnmes for 
t.unn~"'unities, groups and ii~dividuais with particular emphasiS 
en ::.p~cific community needs. 
111. Lectures to schools and community groups 011 specific aspects, 
f1 n 1c1 ions and objectives of the Police service and other related 1ss·ues. 
, 1. Develop, implement and evaluate training programmes 
C(inststent with the Community Policing thrust. Emphasis must be 
placed on providing knowledge, skills and ti:.~ing vvith respect to 
e nh~ncmg the peiiom-tance of Community Poiicing function. 
16 To ensure that all records and statistics relevant for community 
mtervention are properly prepared and rnajntamed. 
~ 7. To prepare and direct correspondence and reports for the 
necessary action. 
1 B Perfo1ms other duties related to ;ob function which mav be 
• J 
<1ssigned from time to time . .. 
D. POLICE SERGEANT (GENERAL)- DIVISIONAL POSTING 
PUTIES & RESPONSIBI.LITl].S: 
1 S-upetvises and co-ordinates the activities of a squad of Police Offie2rs 
in a Police Station or assigned to a shift.. This involves: 
11 de'VIsing work schedules and assigning duties; 
H) monitoring and revie\·vlng work perfom1ed by staff; 
iii) appraising and evaluating the perfonnancc of staff; 
1Vl providing guidance and recommending the appropriate 
training for staff; 
v} granting time-off and approving leave; 
vi} initiating disciplinary action, 
vii) condtJcting roll callm specting appearance of officers and 
examining condition of equipment for confo1mity with 
departrnental standards , before issuing to officers at the 
beginning and end of each tour of duty. 
2. Conducts I directs investigationsofaUeged or suspected 
t"'iminal Violations of the law. This involves, inter alia, 
examining the scene forclues 1 evidence, interrogating witness, 
supervising the lifting of fingerprints, photographing evidence, 
an.ajyzing records, writes and submits reports to supervisor. 



-
64/7 
3. An-ests suspected vioiators of the law and obtains evidence where 
possible for prosecuting cases 1n Court. 
4, Checks 1 reviews reports submitted by staff for sufficiency of ev!.dence 
to justify prosecution. 
;,. Attends court as a complamant or witness. 
6. Examines and certifies police logbooks I registers I abstracts I pocket 
diaties to ensure that entr1esjreports are recorded in accordance With 
regulations I established procedures. 
7. Investigates and submits repo1is to senior officer on applications for 
Fireann Users' Licences, Liquor Licences and other such licences. 
8. Lectures to subordinates on regulations and policies, imp11cattons of 
new or amended laws and new techniques of police work; and to Schools and 
other commtmity groups on specific aspects, functions and objectives of Police 
Department. 
9. Serves and executes \varrants, summonses and other legal/ official 
documents as directed by relevant authority. 
10. ·Secures the property of pisoners and conducts regular checks to ensure 
their secunty and well-being. 
1'1. Vistts and observes officers on patrol or those stationed at designated 
areas to ensure compliance vvith regulations I established procedures. 
"12. Plans and conduclt; certain police operations such as road blocks and 
searches af vehicles i buildings J persons for general violations of the law. 
11 Checks Receipt Books and ensures that monies collected are 
deposited/ disbursec;l in accordance with relevant ·financial regulations. 
14. Maintains records of personnel, equipment, prisoners, 
compla1nts I reports, etc. and prepares weekly I monthly returns/ reports for 
submission to senior officer. 
15. Performs general police duties such as; crowd controt escort duties, 
maintaining law and order at court, political meetings and public functions . 
16. Performs administrative functions as ex officio Justice of the Peace. 
17. Renders initial assistance to persons found 111 or injured. 
18. Performs the duties of Property Keeper in a smaD Police Station_ 
19. To lectme and guide subordinate members on areas of Community 
Poiidng its philosophy, the legal frame work and the techniques, sldTis and 
strategies. required 1br practice . 
.................... /8 



04/8 
20. lo assist in the management of Police Youth Oubs and the 
t.ievelopment of training programmes which would be geared towards 
providing members with special skills and knowledge relevant to 
the needs to the respective groups. 
2l. To supervise and plan activities with Divisional Heads and 
community leaders designed to alleviate communities and sodeta1 
1ils anci directed towards enhancing sOCial func..tionlng. 
22 To develop training programrnes for Police Officers that v • .tiH 
;n .. Teas.o their effectiveness in handl1ng comn-rtm1ty probletT\S. 
' 1 ·ro plan strategies together v.tith mem bers of DiVJsionai ·cnits and 
t: It ~ f ·: nnm\mity towards solVing rommun1ty problems. 
24 Tt' advise and lecture to merr1bers of community groups 
mduciing schoois 
.:.). ?e1forms other duties related to _job function which tltay be 
.~S'il&,'l~ect for tirne to time. 
E. POUCE aJRPORAI. (GENERAL) - DIVISIONAL POSTING 
.DUTIES AND ~<;PONSIBIIJTIES 
1 Supervises the actiVities of Police Officers assigned to a sh1ft 
or assists a Police Sergeant in supervising the operations of an assigned 
shift in a Section I Unit. This involves: 
i} Devising work schedules and assigning duties; 
1D Conducting ro11 can and inspecting un1tom1 equiprnent; 
ni) Providing guidance and recommending the appropriate 
training for staff; 
:vl Ens1..mng that repo1ts from members of the public are 
recorded and attended to promptly by dispatching officers 
and patrol cars; 
v} Appraising and evaluating the performance of staff; 
vi} Receiving. and recommending leave; 
vii) Inspecting and certifying logbooks, pocket diaries and 
abstracts and other documents. 
2 Visits officers on assignments to observe their appearance and 
actMhes and gives guidance or direction-where necessary. 
1 Patrols assigned areas on foot or in patrol vehJc!es to maintain the 
peitce, prevent cime and an-est violators of the lavv . 
............. /9 



M/9 
4. Records and secures physjcal evidence and the property of p1isoners. 
5. Records infom1ation in the logbook on suspects and advises ptisoner of 
charges being proffered against them, sets bail for prisoners he1d on minor 
offences and finger ptints prisoners before secunng them in the cell 
6. SelVes and executes warrants, sumrnonses and other official documents 
as directed by relevant authority. 
7. Lectures to staff on po1ice work such as police ethics, investigative 
methods. community relations and care of firearms. 
8. Writes and submits report on daily activities to supetvisor, where 
necessary. 
9. V1sits scenes of crime 1 accidents to 1nvestigate drcumstances of 
particular case, questions and takes statements from persons concerned and 
examines scenes to obtajn clues and other eVidence; writes reports and 
submits to supervisor. 
10. Attends court as a complainant or Witness. 
11. Examines applications for issuance of Fiream1s Users' Ucences, Uquor 
Licences, and Recreation Club Licenses to ensure conformity wjth stated 
requirements. 
12. Partfctpate in poNce operations such as roadblocks, searches of 
premises I establishments f vehicles for violations of law. 
13. Assumes the responsibiiity for the management of the Police 
Station I Section I Unit in the absence of the supervisor. 
14. Pe1iOtms general po11cc duties such as: crowd control, escort duties. 
traffic duties, maintaining Jaw and order at court, political meetings and pubhc 
functions. 
!~. Establish communication v.-ith individuals and groups in the 
communities, facil!tating the identifications of community issues and needs. 
16. Collaborate with other Stations within a Division- co-ordinating 
designing and developing programmes for eornmunities, groups and 
individl!als with particttlar emphasis on specific community needs. 
17. Assist in establishing Youth Oubs, Community Watch Groups, guiding 
and supporting their activities through networking of resources. 
18. To assist in community research by ens~uing that data are appropriately 
conected and collated particularly in· areas of domestic violence, juvenile 
delinquency etc. 
19. To guide· and support subordinates in managing their community 
projects. 
.. ............. /10 



64tl 0 
c:u To assist memb ers oft he com rf\Unttv in olannin_g strateoies to l u o· 
solve community problems. 
21 Pertonns other d11ties related to Job function which may be 
assigned from time to time . 
F POLICE CONSTABLE (GENERAL) DIVISIONAL POSTING 
DlJTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES: 
1. Enforces and maintains law and order in as assigned geographical 
area. This involves: 
n) 
·ii ) ! tt 
vi) 
patrolling areas on foot or in patrol vehiclesi 
AlTesting violators of iaw; 
Participating in the conduct of searches of persons/ 
vehicles I premises; 
Operating/ driving police vehicles. 
2. Conducts investigations of alleged or suspected criminal 
vinli1t lc;r:s of law. 1h1s involves inter alia examining scene fni clues I 
evJdcn,-:c and inte1Togating \..vrtnes.:;es: v,!fites and submits report to 
.-;upei ... 'iSoJ'. 
-, 
). J1rects and controls the tlo'N of traffic and enforces traffic laws 
a~ necessary. 
4. Participates in cetiain police operations such as roadl)locks, 
searches of vehicles/buildings/persons for general violations of law. 
5. Attends court as a complainant or witness. 
6. Guards suspects such as those at police stations and those 
undergqing treatment at health institt1tions. 
7. Records, setVes and executes wan·ants, summonses and other 
official documents as directed by relevant authority. 
~"~. Records, secures physical evidence and the property of ptisoners. 
9 Perfonns other police duties such as: iingetprinting suspects; 
crowd contro l; escorl duties; sentry duties ; guarding VJ.P's and other 
dignitaries; maintaining law and order at court and public functions . 
·1 :.~ To assist in the establishment and development of Youth Clubs 
imd other Community groups atmed at developing its members in a 
oos1tiv~ manner. 
'1 1 To assist in deveioping programmes aimed at promoting 
'·'\:·hole~om e communities using skills efforts s-uch as planning, designing. 
organising and networking \•Vith relevant community groups . 
..... ~-...... /11 



64/11 
12. To identify and ammgc social and/ or psychological support for victims 
of domestic violence. These resources can include counsemng and Safe 
Housing. 
13. To assjst domestic violence victims desirous of obtaining legal redress 
or support, by providing them \vith inionnation and guidance, such as for e.g 
how to obtain a orntecticn order in accordance with the law. 
l.:t T,--' int mi<i ... )~ with r~sit;{Bn~e . 1·~~}1.)rt;t ~h!.";~i r probl~ms and to report 
communities' problems to supervlsors. 
15. 1·,, assist in oevelr"plnu &.:tl':.>t<->•"'e" ~(\ ... ·t·v'-'. '')'11'"11\\n;'·v ..-----!-\;;:.1'-"" .. ~a- .. d. - - " '"'' • .... 0 v •. w vt,l \) ~,",.,__~\.' ,.,..~1 1.~. w 1t..J rJ1~JU""' It~. 
16. Pertom1~ other duties related to job function, which may be assigned 
from time tn time. 
PART Ill:.. NIL 