(ag DPS UD t-
i : EP ¢~ Tels Corn Pes 65%
\i x x Lod,
Ministry of Tertiary Education Ps y i
and Skills Training 5
Levels 16-18 Tower C Telephone: (868)627-9508
International Waterfront Complex Fax: (868)627-5437
JA Wrightson Road
Port of Spain, Trinidad WI.
TEST: 16/9/4
Mr Carl Francis oe 7 a 2 CENED Se ; =
Permanent Secretary fof % ‘ ac ? a
Ministry of National Security a § ai Oita be:
Temple Court 1 ‘wan oes.
31-33 Abercromby Street YY “, AS
Dear Mr Francis, Paes
Re: Introduction of Post Graduate Studies in Forensic Science —
University of the West Indies
As the line Ministry with responsibility for the University of the West Indies, | write
seeking support for the introduction of a Post Graduate Degree in Forensic Science
being offered by the University’s Faculty of Medical Sciences.
Recognising the critical role of forensic science to assist the criminal justice system and
the police service of the country in solving crime, the Ministry is of the view that the
proposed course of study will benefit the country and citizens.
The programme which is expected to span four (4) semesters, will be multi-disciplinary
utilizing experts from physical and biological sciences: and legal and criminal
investigation backgrounds. It is targeting staff of police and security services; members
of the criminal justice system; and science, medical and law graduates.
On behalf of the University of the West Indies, your support is being sought for the
initiative in the following ways:
i. Permission to use crime scene investigation facilities and resource personnel at
Camp Cumuto;
ii. | Sensitise staff under your Ministry to the programme; and
ii. | Support qualified and suitable candidates from your Ministry to enroll in the
programme.


--- page break ---

| wish to therefore seek your assistance to facilitate the above request. If required, a
proposal can be forwarded for your consideration.
If you require additional information, you can contact Dr. Chalapathi Rao, Head of
Department of Paraclinical Sciences who is spearheading this initiative. His contact
details are as follows:

Dr. Chalapathi Rao

Head of Department of Paraclinical Sciences

Building #5

Eric Williams Medical Sciences Complex

Mt Hope

Faculty of Medical Sciences

University of the West Indies

St Augustine

Phone: 645-2640 Ext: 2323/2331.

Email: Chalapathi.Rao@sta.uwi.edu
Yours sincerely
Angela oar a
Permanent Secretary (Ag.)
